been a greate negligent in mee for soe doeing. I am now come to Barracoe and they doe promise to helpe mee with 8 or 10 slaves, how true itt is cannot tell but will stay one weeke to see the event of itt, and then make the best of my way to your Worship. Itt cannot be expected that where the factory's are and soe many ships comes, to gleane much after them. The slaves I have received on board from Captain Young att Accra the 24th [sic:= 14th?). This morning I am makeing the best of may way to your Worship. I have purchased but 12 slaves. The canoe could not stay, forct to send this letter. [Draper reached Anomabu, presumably on his way back to Cape Coast, on 1 October 1683, and took in com there (no.371).] TRANSATLANT IC VOYAGES The Edgar, Commander Charles Bowler [Bowler was at Anomabu, where he picked up oyster shells, presumably for use in Cape Coast, on 11 February 1683 (no.210). Having presumably called at Cape Coast in the interim , he was back at Anomabu on 25 February, as reported below, to embark James Nightingale (earlier RAC chief factor at Komenda and Accra), who served as factor for his voyage until May. Robert Hollings, who had served with Nightingale in the RAC factory at Accra in 1681 (no.396), was probably also a locally-based RAC employee serving temporarily on Bowler's ship.] 574. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 25 Feb. 1680/1 I have according your Honours and Counsells order delivered your letters to Mr Thelwall and Mr Hassell. Mr Thelwall will deliver mee the sheetes ordered both from Annamaboe and Agga. Captain Bowler came into this road about 2 a clock. The Captain wants bagges for his corne.63 [Around the beginning of March 1681 Bowler supplied goods to the RAC factory at Anashan (nos 120-1), and was subsequently off Egya, which he left on 3 March (no.382.] 575. James Nightingale Wyamba, 9 March 1680/1 Accordinge your Honours order [I] delivered the 5 hand canoe in all hast to Mr Franckland alt 8 a clock at night, but he did not depart the shipp teJI momin; sent per ditto canoe for the 200 pieces brawlls and 20 pieces long clotl honour ordered me to receave from Mr Windover, butt yett noe more from ditto Windover than 120 pieces brawlls whereof above 40 pieces damn ified, and allso 20 pieces Jong cloth all damnifyed.64 Wee have alsoe a great quantity of damnifyed tapseels good for nothing at all, eatten up by the worme, they came 5 or 6 years agoe per Captain Powlegrines [var. Pol green]. As to our proseeding I hope will goe on well, butt at our comeing in this roade we found 2 English interloopers which gott aJJ the slaves that was at the water side, but I comeing ashoar hinderd their design, alsoe spoke to the natives to cut away their boats, but they [= the interlopers] came to understand the same [and] went away from thence to windwards. The Queen of Anguina will be downe with me next Fryday and then I hope will bring downe some slaves, but they are very deare. The interloopers have given 2 ounces of gold for a slave. Heare came by yesterday a canoe from Alampo, the canoe men reportes that att ditto place is 6 sayles of shipes, 2 Duch 2 English interloopers and 2 Portugees. The slaves there are dire [ = dear?] and full of the small pox, the onely commodity there is comes[ = cowries] and Jong cloths, the which we have not aboard. Notwith.standing I doe assure your Honour and Counsell that I will doe my utmost indea.vour for the creditt and proffit of my masters the Royall Affrican Company according to mean capassety. Wee want here iron barrs and would have sent for the same to your Honour and Counse ll, but Mr Franckland beeing one board of our shipp tould Captain Bowler and his mate it was but a folly to send to your Honour and Counsell for any more goods, you had entrusted with me so much goods already, and that I was a pittiful rasskall, and when I came to Accra [he] would kick me downe stay res, and that if had but spooke to your Honour you would putt him in my place, and severall other words not fitt to be write. I doe assure your Honnour that itt troubles me much to see a man affront his fellow companyon undeserved, I desier God to doe by him as he would be done by. Soe having noe more att present onely hope God Almighty will bless your honour and Counsell in all health and prosperity, and assure your.selfe and Counsell that there shall be nothing wanting to dispach Captain Bowler what lieth in my capascity. [PS] Mr Bicknall will give your Honour a furder account. Pray excuse me this, being ritten on my hast. Mr Bicknall has delivered Mr John Hilliard abourd the shipp Edgar, [he] came last night here. Captain Bowler desiers your Honour and Counsell to give him a receipt for his slaves, come [and) mal1egettee which he bought out of his windward cargo. 576. James Nightingale & Robert Hollings Alampo, 25 March 1681 This brings an account of our proceedings since wee left Caboe Corsoe. To mention the number of Negroe slaves wee received from Annamaboe may be unnecessary, wee proceed to relate what Negroe slaves wee purchased at Wyamba and soe leeward to this place. Our purchase at Wyamba was in all 13 Negroe slaves. Some time wee spent there, for that the natives promised a great trade for slaves, if wee would stay, which when wee found fmstrate, wee sail'd downe to Accra. Here indeed wee had the choyce of 19 Negroe slaves, out of which wee could hardly find 7 fitt to be putt aboard shipp. Wee fear some may be conceald, for what reason know not, the fault is not ours. From Accra wee received 120 pieces brawles, and those much damaged; wee likewise received 20 pieces oflong cloth, in which but 4 pieces vendible. This is not the way to dispatch the shipp, her demorage 65 approaching, and the charge great, besides our cargoe on board is not vendible, the one halfe. By invoyce inclosed is mentoned what goods wee want, without which wee cann proceed noe farther, and it may be supposed the Royall Company will enquire the occasion of payment of freight more then by bill of lading shall be made manifest. This is what we ought to acquaint your Worshipp with, to avoid prolexity is our care. Wee are now promised a quantity of slaves if goods to purchase them. Wee wait your Worshipps answer. [JnclosureJ An account of what goods wee want for dispatch of the shipp Edger, Captain Charles Bowler Commander In primis tapseeles broad nicconees ditto sheets long clothes white cowries allajares sletias fine musqueets bright boysadoes These are the severall sorts of goods inquired affter here. 577. Robert Hollings Alampo, 25 March I 681 Per this conveyance your Worshipp will receive the needfull menconed as to the ships dispatch. I have farther thought it requisite to acqu int you r Worshipp of our way in negotiacon, vizt Mr James Nightingale continued ashore at the several! places of trading, for which there is an absolute necessity, per reason wee meete interlopers, Portugues and Dutch ships, where wee come. I send him what goods he writes for, and soe far as I can yctt perceive hee does use the utmost of his endeavour for the Royall Company intrest. Igoe some times on shore to inspect his actions, and shall continue in the same while wee are upon the coast, and at the shipp[s) dispatch shall carefully render your Worshipp a faithful! accompt of all transactions etc. 578. Charles Bowler On board the Edgar, Alampo, 25 March 1681 My occasion of my writing unto you at present is that my time groweth very short according to charter partye, which is not above 7 dayes longer affter the deate hereof, and therefore I desire your Worship and Councills letter for my security for the 20 dayes of demorage by order in Charter pa1tye by the Royall Affiican Com .pany of England there , which I think my selfe not secured without your Worshipp and Councills order, for at this time wee have on board of our ship but 101 Negroe slaves on board, which is not one third part of our complement, but wee are prom.ised the rest in 4 weekes time after the date hereof. If itt be nott, it will be for want of good goods, and if it should please your Worship and Councill I was informed at Accra that Mr Thelwall had purchased about 20 slaves, which would doe me a great kindness now in our destress, and one thing I would desire your Worship if you please to send me a receipt for the 22 slaves that I bought to windward, malligeeta and come, which you [have] the account of it with you. 579. James Nightingale Alampa, 6 April 168 l My last to your honour was the 24th March, wherein I desired of your honour more recruit of goods by reason sayes, perpettuanes, Ginny stuffs, Welch plaines, knives doe not goe of for slaves, and the Dutch shipp lying heare with good cow1ies, long cloth, fine sletias, bright musquetts, also gives a great rate for slaves, putts me to a stand, also is heare 2 English interlopers which gives 2 ounces of gold for a slave. Therefore pray cons ider in what a condition wee are in. I doe ashure yor honour I doe my best indeavour. The Negroes promises faire, but currant goods purchases slaves, which are broad tapseeles, long clothes white, sheets, brawles , fine sletias, broad nicanneese, allejares, read ground pintadoes, bright musquett s, but especally cowries. Wee have not above 135 Negroes aboard, but the people of the countrey which are gone for slaves are not come downe. Wee expect them dayly with a good quantity, and then will doe my indeavour. Your honour is not unsensable how far wee have gott in the 20 dayes of demorage after the 64 accord ing to charter party, therefore pray Jett me have your Honours and Councills order if you thinke it convenient for Captain Bowler to stay longer upon the coast then the 20 dayes. It would be a great shame, also noe little charges to our masters that the first ship by your Honours dispatched from Guiny should goe without her complement of slaves or there about. My small oppinion is this, that if your honour keepe the shipp longer then the 20 dayes, and send some of the goods afore mentioned, especially broad tapseeles and some othe r of those which are in the Castle, I doe beleeve by degreese and good industry wee may gitt the ships complement of slaves or there about, in 6 weekes time. In my last I forgott to mention of 5 pieces of sayes and 24 blew potkeys I sent to James Mills and Galansa at Wyamba in the 2 hand canoe, 66 with an order to dispose of them for slaves against the canoe comes back e, and if I find good trade would send the 5 hand canoe with more goods, by reason say es doe not goe of here, I ordered him likewise if cou ld git noe slaves for the goods, to dispose of them for gold, and send it per the 2 hand canoe, for gold will purchase slaves heare. I doe ashure your honour and Councill that I study every way to gitt slaves for the ship. I have been like to dye, and had a fitt for 24 houres [so] that I was forsed to be tyed hand and feeit, but praised be God I am very well recovered. I could right your honour a great deale, but will leave it tell I see your honour in parson. 580. James Nightingale & Robert Hollings Alampa, 11 Ap ril 168 I Our last unto your honour was dated the 25th of March and the other the 4th instant, where in wee gave your honour a full account of our proceedings, also what sorts of goods wee wanted for the purchaseing of slaves, but as yett not received any answer. Wee have aboard 140 slaves, and doe what wee can to procure more, with those goods which are vendable. Captai n Bowler intends to saile this day sennet for Acra, and there to land the remains, and there to depart the coast without your Worshipp and CounceU order him to the contrary of staying . In the meane time wee will doe what wee can for the ships dispatch. Soe having noe more to inlarge onely refer our meane capassity to your honours further orde r, which shall be punctually obeyed. 581. Charles Bowler to James Nightingale [on shore at Alampo] On board the Edgar, 20 April 1681 These few lynes are to certifie you that I am resolved to saile to morrow night for Accra, and therefore I desire you to dispatch your buisness to morrow, and come off, for I see noe hopes of the 15 hand canoe comeing downe. 582. James Nightingale & Robert Hollings Edgar, between Accra & Wyamba . way at 10 a clocke at night, 25 April 1681 Last Saterday wee sailed from Alampa and came the last night about 2 a clock in the morning off Accra. Wee sent presently our canoe a shoare to see what orders where there, wee received your Honour and Councells letter dated the 21st instant wherein wee heard the loss of the 15 hand canoe, goods, white men, and slaves, wherefore wee are hartyly sorrey. Per inclosed comes the coppy of Captain Bowlers note, allsoe [that] of Mr Wendover,67 the aforesaid Bowler saying that he wanted water to supply his complement of slaves and that would stay noe longer then the 20 dayes according to charter party without he had your Honours and Councells order thereunto, with a proviseall that the Royall Company should pay him. Wee being at Alampa did our best to gitt what slaves wee could, but wanting a supply of goods was a great hinderance to us, but seeing your Honour and Councill did your indeavour gives us some hopes. The inhabitance at ditto place seeing wee had noe goods vendable beguane to play the rogue with Nightingale a shoare, but with much trouble gott all safe off. He himselfe both goeing ashore and coming aboard was most drounded. Wee have aboard in all about 200 slaves, and wee will doe what wee can to procure more at Wyamba while ditto Bowler gitts his water, and I will give him noe dispatch till furthur orderd of your honour and Councell. If wee must procure slaves at Wyamba, wee will want broad tapseeles, bright musquetts, brawles and sheets. If your honour and Counce II order us to sell those goods for gold which wee cannot for slaves, will follow order, perhaps wee may gitt slaves for gold. At Accra are 4 English interlopers and 2 Dutch ditto. Per the next shall give your Honour and Councell a further account, in the meane time wee will doe what wee can, but if the ship stayes wee will want those goods afore mentioned ... 583. Charles Bowler On board the Edgar between Accra and Wyamba, 25 April 1681 These few lynes are to certifie you that I sett sail from AJampa a Saterday last, being the 23rd instant, I waiting some sartin [=certain] dayes expecting the 15 hand canoe with a supply of goods which I did understand by your Worshipps Jetter, but seeing noe hopes of her coming I thought it convenient to make the best of my way for Wyamba to fill our water againe, but by the way of Accra. I doe understand of your great lost of the 1.5 hand canoe, the which I am hartiely sorrey for it, and I under.stand by your last that Mr Wendover wrotte you concerning Mr Kyte that I would not take him in,68 which is abominable lye, I onely denying his great cheste which would take up more rume than a tun would containe, which Mr Nightingale and Mr Hollings was at present and ditto Nightingale did order Mr Wendover not to lett him imbarke upon noe interloper what soe ever. Concerning your last letter the 21st instant to Mr Nightingale, I understand you have given order not to dispatch me untill I have my complement of 320 slaves, whereof I have not above two thirds of them yeti and my time by charter party hath been out this 6 dayes and my provis.sions groweth short, and I cannot continue myself upon the coast not above 18 or 20 daies longer at furthest without a supplye of provissions , and further I desire your Worship and Councells order for the time that I shall lye upon the coast in purchaseing of slaves above cha1ter party mentioning. I shall make all the dispatch I can in filling of my water and I desire your Worships answer of this in tyme of watering. 584. James Nightingale & Robert Hollings Wyamiba, 7 May 1681 This conveyance br.ings the several coppyes of what wee wrotte you upon the receipt of yours mentioning the unfortunate loss of the 15 hand canoe etc. Per ours to your honour at that time you will find how affaires where with us at that time. According to the dates of them wee have expected some answer, for the want of which Captain Bowler is very impatient, not knowing what it may meane, and likewise his provissions growing very short he is compelled to depart the coast. Wee have desired of ditto Bowler this morning how long he intends to stay for answer from your Honour, he replyed that in his letter bearing date the 25th ultimo he hath signified his mind, the limitt of which time be is resolved not to exceed now, fearing that his with our letters of the same date may not come to hand. Wee have this possitive answer from him, that within 5 dayes from this date he intends for Accra and there to land the remaines, soe go off the coast with those Negroes that are on board, Mr Nightingale having refused to take the goods ashore at tbis place , it beeing as he sayes besides his orders to doe it. Wee have been heere this last time about 11 or 12 dayes. Indeed our trade gives but little incoura[ge]ment, wee having purchased few slaves. The Queen of Anguinna came to this towne on Thursday last, has promised the payment of some part of her debt to the Royall Affrican Company of England, and as the Negroes say is ready with her pawnes for the settlement of a factory here . She likewise promises the best of her indeavour for procuring slaves. She hath allready done this for us (there being an English interloper who came down here the 4th insten, one Richard Lumley Commander) to put one of the natives in irons at the factory, for sending a slave aboard of him, and has com.manded that he be put one board of us. Wee have had an ill accident befalling us aboard, which is the loss of a hogshead of our Negroe brandy, and likewise a great part of our Negroe bread has been throwne over board since wee came here, it being old bread when bought in England as may be beleeved, and not fitt for use. There is absolute necessity for a recruite of brandy for the Negroes, without which if wee depart the coast it may be the loss of many of our Negroes in the voyage. This being the needfull wee humble desire your Honour may be pleased to send us a speedy answer. 585. James Nightingale [Wyamba] 7 [May 1681] At my coming downe here found a shoare a person by name Nicholas Bartrell , whome came from Accra under protection of our flagg desiring your honour be pleased to entertain him in servis of the Company or else to give him his discharge, as he sayes Mr Wendover denied him the same, hee being lodged at a blackes house. I desire your Honours order what to doe in itt. 586. James Nightingale Wyamba, J I May 1681 Your Honour s and Councells much esteemed dated the 6th and 11 of Aprill , allso the 3rd and 7 instant received: wherein I understand your Honours great care and induJgency in ordering me to dispatch Captain Bowler with his complement of slaves. This is to answer that I have done my utmost indeavour and will continue in the same practise. As to our progress at this place, wee have had noe more than 3 slaves, interlopers Jyeing here to windward and leward hinders us much. The Queene being heare as I wrote your honour before hath promj sed to us some part of her debts, allso pawns for the factory, and to procure slaves, the two first I am certaine but the last I question much to procure as many slaves as wee want. She promise faire but they are blackes, I give them but little beleeve. I doe ashure your honour I will doe my uttmost indeavour. Your honour has been pleased to mention that there was suficient suply of goods sent before , you will find that I will give your honour and Councell a good and just account of what received, sould and remaines when I come to Cape Corsoe . I shall according to your honour s order dispose of noe more goods for gold then will procure slaves. Your honour has been pleased to mention of our progress at Alam pa, itt being small incouragement for our Company, and that in all that time I gott but 140 slaves. [I] answer pray consider what ships has been there and the rates they have given, you will finde I have done my indeavour. I am of the same opinion that interlopers will be prevented to come to Guiny by their own imployers when the day of account comes. Your honour has been pleased to mention of the 7 instant that you dayly expected what success wee had at Wyamba. I have given yourhonour a full account the same day per our 2 hand canoe, also that Captain Bowlerwill stay noe longer then 5 dayes after the same date. I have showne your honourand Councells order to Captain Bowler that he should not goe of the coast,with[out?] his slaves or thereabouts, if did it was upon his own accoun t. I doebeleeve ditto Bowler rights to your honour himselfe. He has the 2 letters, one to theCompany, the other lo Mr Steed and Mr Gascoyne. Being sworne one of yourhonours Councell to be true to our masters the Company, am bound to follow thesame. Your hono ur will finde per attest ation my meaning. I take God Allmighty towittness I would doe noe man any rong, but instead, would take his place. I give your honour and Councell humble and harty thankes that you have been pleased tolay your commands upon me; there shall be nothing wanting what my meanecapassity can procure. Jf wee stay heere shall want musquetts , but especially tapseeles, and as for giving your honour and Councell a certai n account of what slaves to procure in such a time or such a time [I] can not doe ill, when I was hearelast with the Portugueese [I?] gott 58 slaves in one months time. Pray Jett the restof the out factorys send what slaves they have. The sea running here mighty high, the 2 hand canoe cou ld not goe before, norcan I gitt well aboard. ln the mean e time I doe what I can, gott this day 2 girl slaves,part of the Queens debt. 587. Charles Bowler On board the Edgar, Wyamba Road, 11 May 1681 The ocasion of my writing unto you is that J understand by Mr Nightingales Jetterfrom your Worship that you doe intend to detain me heare at Wyamba untill I have my full complement of slaves, which I doe want at present about one 120, for I havea areyfd [sic: = arrived?] at this place 15 dayes and wee have golen but 3 slaves inall this time and therefore I thinke it impossible for to gett [them] here if wee Jayehere this 3 months longer, for the Queene and the Atta is come downe from Anguinato this place , and I doe not heare of any slaves that they brought with them, and if you will force me to slay for my full complemen t you must to gett them your selfeor at the other factoryes, for here they are not to be gotten, and 1 must needs tell you I have not above 4 months provissions left in my ship and therefore J cannotstay much longer nor will not, weather you give me my dispatches or not, for I havefulfilled my demorage dayes in charter party and 20 dayes more besides and ourNegroes come spends apace to. Wee have had a grea t mischance aboard concerninga hogshead of Negro brandy which is leaked out and wee shall want it very muchfor them , and farther I doe acquint your Worshipp that some of our Negroes hathgoten the small pox and the longer wee stay J feare will be worse. 588. Charle s Bowler Wyamba, 15 May 1681 Yours I have received dated the 9th instant, and as for going to Accra I was intended for heare. We have been at Wyamba 19 dayes and purchased noe more then 6 slaves and wee have had 7 dead aboard, and therefore I think it will be little proffitte either for Company or owners of our lying heare, having noe assistant from your honour or from any othere factoryes , and as to my provissions I brought anough with me if you had complyed with charter party. As you say I comp laine of a months time of demorage, but the Company will find 45 dayes from this deat; and as for my going to Arda I am very free to [do so] with a provisor I might have my complement of slaves, but how they will be gotten without goods I know not, and for me to goe from place to place to be lead by the nose as I have been aJlready, I am quite a weary of it. If your honour had send goods for Arda there might be some hopes of pur.chasing of them, for Captain Bell lay a considerab le time for want of goods to buy his slaves, and I dont understand how wee shall gett them without goods to. I am willing to goe downe to Arda for the rest of our slaves, for they are not to be had heare at Wyamba, but I desire your honours order for what quantity of time I shall stay at Arda if slaves to be had, if not to depart the coast. [PS] I hope your honour will not be unmindful of a hogsheads of brandy for our Negroes, for there is a great necessity for itt. 589. James Nightingale Wyamba, 15 May 1681 Your honours and Councells dated the 9th, 10 and 12 instant came safe to hand, allsoe a chest of musquetts, 25 tapseeles, 5 men and 9 women slaves, all aboard Captain Bowler. In answer to your honours of the 9 instant is this, Captain Bowler is very free to goe to Arda, as he sayes , but wants goods for ditto place as per his letter. My humble desire is that you would be pleased send your possitive order what I shall doe with the remaines of the Companys merchandies, eather to put them ashore heare or att Accra. Alsoe if Captain Bowler goes to Arda if I should consigne ditto Bow ler to Edwin Steed and Stephen Gascoyne Esquires, the Com.panyes factors at Barbadoss, with those slaves he has on board or not, I being very dubeous in this case because your honour has ordered me before not to dispatch him before he had 300 slaves or there about or else your possitive order. I have given Captain Bowler your Honours 3 letters, and sent yesterday the 2 before. As to your Honours of the l 0 instant I shall do my endeavour for Captain Bramfill after Captain Bowler is gone from me according to order. In answer of your Honours of the 12 instant shall acte for my masters good as much as possib le can. In the 9 hand canoe will send Nicholas Bartrell, which departs tonight. If your honour please to have 7, 9 or 11 hand canoes pray give me order to buy any of them and what I shall give for them . In the meantime desire your possitive order, which shall be all wayes obeyed. [PS] The 14 slaves above are 1 man, 6 woemen from Mr Thelwall, 69 and 4 men, 3 woemen from Agent Generali and Counce!!. 590. James Nightingale Wimba, 20 May 1681 Your Honours and Counce ls of the 18th instant I have received, also 14 men and 11 women slaves, but send [back] per bearer 2 men delivered in the 9 hand canoe, by reason indeed they are not good, also Capta in Bowler saies hee cannot take them aboard, for hee will not give a receipt for them. Captain Bouler intends to sayle for Accra this night, there to land the remains and soe to say le for Arda. I have given him the letter to Mr Goulding. I shall according order accompany him to Accra there to take a receipt of the Companys remains. After getting what slaves at Accra shall within 3 days after arrived there con.signe what slaves are abord to Edwin Steed and Stephen Gascoyne Esquires, the Compaany factors in Barbadoes. As to Mr Wendover delivering slaves abord of interloopers, denieing to me them for the Compaany use, I doe believe your Honour had an accompt before now, and as for the fi.1ture to come shall hinder as much as possible I can. Shall also deliver the letters to them directed. As touching the canoes: llhandcanoe  .................  Mk-... 7 ... 11  7 hand ditto, 3 pieces sayes, or  4 .... 2  (The 9 hand canoe is not yett come)  If your Honour likes them at the above rates pray send your order and men to fetch them away. The owner of thee 11 hand canoe will give the other sayes. [lnclosed] James Nightingale to Mr Bucknell [Undated] I send per bearer 2 men slaves, the receipt for the men is in the Agents letter. Pray bring those 2 slaves to Caboe Corse again [in] the 9 hand canoe. You will likewise receive 6 pieces of irons. [Bowler proceeded back to Accra, where Nightingale left the ship in order to take temporary charge of James Fort (no.396).] 591. Robert Hollings Ship Edgar, Accra, 23 May 1681 I need not mencon any thing more relateing to our proceedings since we left Cape Cors Castell, wee having from time to time advized your Honoms of the severall occurrences in the voyage to this place, where tis ordered that wee shall have our dispatches and then to say le to Arda to com pleat our number of 320 Negroe slaves, of which wee now want 87. Per the bills of ladeing and the account, your Honour will perceive how many received on bord at all places, out of which are deceased in all 19, vizt 8 males and 11 females, of which number 6 were received from Cape Coast Castle, and l from Accra. In the account your Honour will find to be short in the tapseels 11 pieces, I doe sweare I saw noe more , not 1piece than specified in the account, and beleive that they came not on bord. I wish Mr Bridge had taken receipt (as the usuall manner is) for the goods so put on board, then the error would have been man ifested with ease, of the sort of goods many came loose on bord, all the other answering the invoice, except the afore menconed tapseels. Your Honour etc. may perceive by the severall letters sent you that slaves were not easily pur.chased where we have been , and truly I am glad we have so many on bord, which had not been purchased had not Mr Nightingale been acquainted with the coast and likewise industriou s in this affair. [Bowler then proceeded to Offra, where he collected a further 87 slaves, and from where he departed in June 1681 (no.477).] The Merchant Bonadventure, Commander John Lowe [Lowe was at Accra, where he delivered letters and took in cowries, in Feb .ruary 168 I (no.39 l).) 592. John Lowe & Thomas Gou lding70 On board the Marchant Bonadventure , 18 Apr. 1681 This day wee parted with Wludaw with 529 slaves on board, but the ship hath sprung a very great leake , as much as two pumps can keepe her free. Now wee intended for Ophra to put the remaine s on shoare. Wee have left Mr Thorne and Robert Chapman with the remaines of the goods wee had ashoare att that place [ = Whidaw ], the King haveing such a desire to have a factory settled there, and finding itt something dubious to gett the goods off without some time, the ship being leakey, we told the King [we) would referr the further settleing of itt till further order. Our oppinion in itt is that itt will very much advance the Companys interest, by the great quantity of slaves that is to be had from that place, and the great awe to Ophra, who att present slites our English factory and nation and dus not allow halfe the libberty to us as to the Dutch, provided that that factory be accountable to Ophra (and dependant upon that), besides the better convenience for getting of water for shipping and not above 6 leagues from Ophra. Now if this concor with your prudience itt will be convenient that you send downe another man to Mr Thorne whoe is an accountant. 71 The Alexander, Commander Andrew Branfill [Bran fill delivered goods to Anashan on IOMay 1681 (no.129) and Ano ma bu on 12 May (no.225).] 593. Andrew Branfill [Place unknown], 23 May 1681 I thought convenient to give you a line concerning my slave cargoe, weather it be thought by you and Councell most for our Companyes interest to carry the remain es home or to put them ashoar if any remaines be. [Concerning] the 45 slet ias, I signed for fine sletias but find 15 corse and the other 30 to be a kind of dowlas and not fine sletias, I question weather they will answer expectation. I understand Captain Bowler is going off the coast, I hope you will be pleased now to Jett me see some of your assistance concerning getting my slaves. I am now going to Tantumquerey. After I have had a vew of the place and find how the people are afected Ile give you my judgment according to your desire. 594. William Todd Alexander , [Tantonquerry], 2 June 1681 The Captain according to your worships request came to ancl1or before Tanton.query, where one of the chiefe men came a board to give the Captain an invitation ashoare and told us of much slaves they could procure in a little time for us. The Captain prest him to send the slaves aboard, but nothing would satisfy them, with.out the Captain or myselfe goeing ashoare first, soe I went ashoare and several] of the cabasheirs came to give me their hands, and was verry kind to mee the time I was ashoare. Wee have laid in the road 10 dayes and has got no more but 9 slaves of them. The King is up in the country and sent one of his men downe to tell the Captain he would come downe shortly with slaves, but there being very little money wee thought not worth the while of staying any longer, yet I doe beleeve that if a factory were setled here there might be good store of slaves procured , and in time might be a place of good trade . I greatly feare that wee shall be put to a nonplus in procuring of our slaves, for nothing goes off wth us, but sayes, perpetuanoes , sheets and some tapsells. Paut.keys, fine clouts and committers wee have not sold one since wee left Cape Corso roade. [PS] The Captain gives his humble service to your worshipp and hopes you will not forgett in assisting him with some Negroes. 595. William Todd Allam po, 13 July 168 I Haveing the oppertunity by a Dutch man to convey this to Accra I thought good to give your worship an account of our proceedings. The Captain is now very ill and in a feavour. Wee have now about 200 slaves but abundance of them woemen, our goods not being very proper to purchase them with. As for the long blew cloths, pautkeys, pewter, none of them is vendible here. Niccanees narrow sometimes wee get two or three off, as likewise the pintadoes. If you would doe us the favour as to Jett us have 100 pieces of your fine sletias and 150 of your broad niccanees by the first itt would doe us a great kindness, either of the Companys account or elce the Captain will exchange pautkeys, fine clouts, committers belonging to the windward trade at prime cost with your worship for them, and likewise let the canoe that comes with those things may take up the remaynes with the helpe of our long boate to Accra, for the ship cannot tume itt up haveing no land breezes. [PS] If your worship please to send these things by a 5 hand canoe to let the canoe attend of us IOdayes will doe us a great kindness. 596. Andrew Branfill Ophra in Arda, 18 Aug. 1681 [I] thought fill to give you a line to satisfie you of my proceedings. I am now in good health, praised be God for itt, and have all my slaves on board and have put my remaines on shoare, which is 125 peeces narrow niccanees and 96 comitters, here at Arda, and Mr Thome hath signed the wrightings you sent to goe home with mee.72 1 have nothing of news to wright. PS. 12 of the narrow niccanees above specified which is out of the Castle are stained or damnified. The Unblessed Blessing, Commander Samuel Rickard [Rickard took in com from Anashan in June 1681 (nos 135-6, 228).] 597. Samuell Rickard From aboard the Unblessed Blessing, 13 Aug.1681 These give you an account that Mr James Nightingale hath been on board us in his passage to Wyamba, that our boate hath been that way 15 or 16 dayes, [it?] hath sent me up 4 men 4 woemen Negroes. Find slaves hard to come by both at An.namaboe and all other places. Have now on board 153 Negroes, 100 of them woemen kind. Have disposed of almost all our goods except powder, gunns and iron, and baftas. Sletias and sayes being the principle goods where the shipp lies. If you please to help mee with more sletias and sayes, allejars or such goods as you have it may be I may purchase more slaves at Annamaboe. I heare of a case of sletias at Annamaboe, which if you please to order mee ly convenient to receive I sell them for 8 angles, in account you can gett noe more for them ashoare. I have indeavoured to gett what slaves I can for money, knowing that I have not goods to procure above halfe my number, and have laid out 8 marke. Find I cannot procure Negroes without goods and know not where to goe or how to come by my number, being well infonn'd that both French and Dutch, as far as Arda, doth blow upon gold without goods, there haveing been soe many att the say [= essay?] before mee. I find I cannot sell gunns, powder or iron, which goe a great way in the vallue of my less than 600£ cargoe. I am in great straite, not knowing what to doe. My provisions goes short for white men, haveing laien 90 odd dayes since I came to Capo Corsoe, and on my voyage to this time, 9 months. I intend to come to Capo Corsoe about Monday or Tuesday next. [PS] My yaule went yesterday to our long boate. At her returne I intend for Capo Corsoe. 598. Samuell Rickard 20 Aug. 1681 Our number of Negroes are not much increased. Since I came to Capo Corsoe I have received from Mr Richards 73 10 sletias, being I think all that is unsold. Pray please to Jett my mate receive the 20 peeces of sayes, some allejars and what Negroes you have for us, all which will be to the furtherance of [myself]. [Rickard was off Kormantin on 29 August 1681 (no.500); in September he received one slave supplied from the factory at Anashan (no.149, 154); and in early October was at Accra (no.414).] 599. Abraham Wise [Ophra in Arda], 14 Nov. 1681 My humble service to you to informe you of our affairs here in Ophra in Arda, is that Captain Rickard hath gott his slaves through some trouble, his goods being short in answer to the quantity of Negroes, but good fortune attending mett with slaves for money. The King of Arda hath received goods for 5 slaves but since cannot heare from him, soe that wee are forct to leave them, and one with the Phidolgoe that hee had sworne us out of, not knowing how to helpe ourselves , soe that wee have all our slaves except those 6. The factory is very badly furnished, having nothing but a few niccanees and some commetters and iron, which is noe commodity att all.74 They ashoare in the factory is well and hath been very kind to us. Our Captain hath been very sick but att present indifferent. The Vine, Commander Abraham Cooke 600. Abraham Cooke [No place), 19 Aug. 1681 These are for to acquaint you that I have been out of England ever since the 18th May and I was the last ship that came away. I thought Captain Finey and Captain Lawrence had been here, for I have seen noe ships since I came out sea [until?] the last night that I see your pink and 2 interlopers that are now in the ofing for your ship fired then out of the place whence they lay att Commenda. I am bound for Old Callibarr 75 for the Company, the ships name is the Vine, the ship that Captain Bram fill commanded last. If you please to have mee come ashoare I will if you send a canoe off to mee, and I shall stay till I have your answer. The Lion , Commander Giles Lawrence 601. Giles Lawrence The Ship Lyon, Dicky's Cove, 26 Aug. 1681 In conformity to the Royall Companys orders I send this express with the letters received from them for you; and allthough an entire sale be not as yett procure d to the cargoe committed by them to my disposal!, I despaire not but in a few dayes there will, and then to be capacitated with the oppertunity of kissing your hands att Capo Corsoe. lntrim come being here att one angle and halfe per chest, please to favour rnee with the price, and plenty itt may being with you, for my governance. [PS] What endeavour I have used itt hath not been possible for mee to purchase more than 5 negroe persons. [Lawrence was off Anomabu , where he delivered gunpowder to the RAC factory, in Oct. 1681 (no.246); and later at Accra, whence he departed for Ningo on 12 December 1681 (no.422).] The Sarah Bonadventure , Commander Thomas Woodfine [Woodfine was at Anomabu by 10 December (no.251), and left there around the beginning of January 1682 (no.254). Arthur Wendover embarked at Ac.cra, to go to Whydah, where was to take over as RAC chief factor (no.423).] 602. Arthur Wendover Wyamba Road, 5 Jan. 1681/2 This day att 11 of the clock, I came safe on board the Sarrah Bonadventure, and to Captain Thomas Woodfine Commander did deliver to himselfe the 2 boxes (the Royall Companys pacquett) and alsoe your worships particular letters. For the aforegoeing particulars made ment ion of, here is the receipt inclosed for them according to your worships orders [lnclosure] According to your desire I have sent up the Quarrenteers man, and had you com .manded a greater matter itt should have been obeyed Thomas Woodfine [In March I682 Thomas Woodfine was reported still at Whydah, trying to complete his complement of slaves (no.483).] The Charles, Commander Edward Hill 603. Edward Hill Annamaboe , 25 Jan. 1681/2 These may acquaint you that I have this day begun to take in my come and doubt not but to have itt all in this weeke. And for slaves some few to be purchased , if had goods which they demand or give the price in gold as other ships give, which is 7 pease 2 angles for a man and 6 pease and 2 angles for a woeman. I have little remaines on board which these people requier. I humbley desire you will please to supply with the goods following , perpettuanoess green and blew, tapsells, sletias of either sort, allejars, Guyny stuffs, powder and sayes. Whatt J have remaining on board is iron , sheets, pintadoes, red perpettuanoes, and some few sayes. I intend my long boate up to mo now for water. If your honour thinks convenient for to send mee these goods aforementioned she shall leave the water caske, and come up for them the next day. Captain Woodfine hath aII his come in, but when hee intends to sayle I know not. 604. Edward Hill Annamaboe, 26 Jan. I681/2 Yesterday I wrote to your Honour at large as to the price of slaves. I assure you theres nothing wanting on my part, without tools I cannot worke. Captain Woodfine gives the prices I advised yesterday in gold, and hath sletias and allejars, which are the goods every one demands. When he goes hence I know not. These come by my longboat, who will receive what goods your honour will please to order me; and for the prices of slaves in gold please to give me your order, which shall be duely observed. What slaves are here to be had the interloper at Amersa and Captain Woodfine sweeps them all away. 605. Edward Hill On board the ship Charles, Anamaboe Road, 31 Jan. 1681/2 Yours of the 26th instant I received, with the goods therein mentioned, and shall duely observe your orders for the disposall of them. As for the sletias they are all gone, soe desire I may have a supply of both sorts, having sent my boat up to receive what you please to order me. I want now 120 chests come to compleat my comple.ment, which is ready.76 606. Edward Hill Anamaboe, 10 Feb. 1681/2 Yours by my long boat I received, and according to your desire I have put Nevin on board Captain Gates.77 This comes by my mate, and desire may have 20 peeces blew and green perpettuane s; as for redds, they will not goe here. 607. Edward Hill Anamaboe, 3 March 1681/2 The red perpettuanos and fine sletias [I] had from you two dayes since, I have disposed of all to 6 peeces of both sorts, and desire may have a supply of 30 peeces of each more, with 10 blew and green perpett uanos. I had sent my boate this morning but the sea breeze blowing all night, was doubtful! of her getting up in time. [Hill was reported to have left Anomabu for Cape Coast Castle on 11 March 1682 (no.264); but he was back at Anomabu, taking in slaves, on 13 April (no.269).] 608. Edward Hill 25 Apr. 1682 Haveing received 44 chests of come and 16 slaves from Mr Richard Thelwall I have accordingly signed bills of loading for what slaves on board vizt 147 men, 160 woemen, 21 boyes and 16 girls, in all 344. [PS] The slaves from Anamaboe were 8 men, 8 woemen. The Sarah Bonadventure, Commander Thomas Woodfine [Woodfine was at Anomabu by IODecember (no.251 ), and left there aroundthe beginning of January 1682 (no.254 ). Arthur Wendover embarked at Ac.cra, to go to Whydah, where was Lotake over as RAC chief factor (no.423) .) 602. Arthur Wendover Wyamba Road, 5 Jan. 1681/2 This day all 11of the clock, I came safe on board the Sarrah Bonadventure, and toCaptain Thomas Woodfine Commander did deliver to himselfe the 2 boxes (theRoyall Companys pacquett) and alsoe your worships particular letters. For theaforegoeing particulars made mention of, here is the receipt inclosed for themaccord ing to your worships orders [lnclosure] According to your desire I have sent up the Quarrenteers man, and had you com.manded a greater maller itt should have been obeyed Thoma s Woodfine [In March 1682 Thomas Woodfine was reported still at Whydah , trying tocomplete his complement of slaves (no.48 3).) The Charles, Comma nder Edward Hill 603. Edward Hill Annamaboe, 25 Jan. I 681/2 These may acquaint you that I have this day begun to take in my come and doubtnot but to have itt all in this weeke. And for slaves some few to be purchased, if had goods which they demand or give the price in gold as other ships give, which is 7pease 2 angles for a man and 6 pease and 2 angles for a woeman. I have littleremaines on board which these people requier. I humbley desire you will please tosupply with the goods following, perpettuanoess green and blew, tapsells, sletiasof either sort, allejars, Guyny stuffs, powder and sayes. Whall I have remaining onboard is iron, sheets, pintadoes, red perpettu anoes, and some few sayes. I intend my long boate up to morrow for water. If your honour thinks convenient for to send mee these goods aforementioned she shall leave the water caske, and come up forthem the next day. Captain Woodfine hath all his come in, but when hee intends to sayle I know not. 604. Edward Hill Annamaboe, 26 Jan. 1681/2 Yesterday I wrote to your Honour al large as to the price of slaves. I assure you theres nothing wanting on my part. without tools I cannot worke. Captain Woodfinegives the prices I advised yesterday in gold, and hath sletias and allejars, which are the goods every one demands. When he goes hence I know not. These come by my longboat, who will receive what goods your honour will please to order me; and for the prices of slaves in gold please to give me your order, which shaJI be duely observed. What slaves are here to be had the interloper at Amersa and Captain Woodfine sweeps them all away. 605. Edward Hill On board the ship Charles, Anamaboe Road, 31 Jan. 1681/2 Yours of the 26th instant I received, with the goods therein mentioned, and shall duely observe your orders for the disposail of them. As for the sletias they are all gone, soe desire I may have a supply of both sorts, having sent my boat up to receive what you please to order me. I want now 120 chests come to compleat my comple.ment, which is ready.76 606. Edward Hill Anamaboe, LO Feb. I 681/2 Yours by my long boat I received, and according to your desire I have put Nevin on board Captain Gates. 77 This comes by my mate, and desire may have 20 peeces blew and green perpettuanes; as for redds, they will not goe here. 607. Edward Hil 1 Anamaboe, 3 March 1681/2 The red perpettuanos and fine sletias [I) had from you two dayes since, I have disposed of all to 6 peeces of both sorts, and desire may have a supply of 30 peeces of each more, with 10 blew and green perpettuanos. I had sent my boate this morning but the sea breeze blowing all night, was doubtful! of her getting up in time. [HilJ was reported to have left Anomabu for Cape Coast Castle on 11 March 1682 (no.264); but he was back at Anomabu, taking in slaves, on 13 April (no.269).) 608. Edward Him! 25 Apr. 1682 Haveing received 44 chests of come and 16 slaves from Mr Richard Thelwall I have accordingly signed bills of loading for what slaves on board vizt 147 men, 160 woemen, 21 boyes and 16 girls, in all 344. [PS] The slaves from Anamaboe were 8 men, 8 woemen. The John Bonadventure, Commander John Woodfine [Woodfine was at Komenda, landing goods for the factory, on 2 Dec. 1681, intending to go from there west to Takoradi (no.46). At some point he took in wood from Anashan (no.171), and on 2 Jan. 1682, he was reported to be at Winneba (no.167). John Smith and John Winder embarked with him to go to Whydah, where Winder was designated to take over as RAC chief factor (cf. nos 484, 492-3).) 609. John Smith & John Winder On Board the John Bonadventure, Wyamba Road, 30 Jan. 1681/2 This may serve to acquaint you that wee safely arrived on board Captain Woodfines ship this noon, who designes to saile tomoITow morning for Accra, where he will stay some houres, and soe proceed on his voyage for Arda. Wee heartily wish your Worship and all the rest of the gentlemen health and happiness , and hope to dis.charge our business to your satisfaction, at least shall endeavor soe to doe. PS. Mr Smith desires you will let Mr Young know that Mr Page sayes he left the scaJes and weights belonging to him , in his chamber. Captain Woodfine presents his humble service to your Worship, to whome I have delivered your letter for Mr Steed and likewise your noat concerning Mr Page, which he shewed to him, and Mr Page promised to write your Worship. JW 610. John Smith & John Winder On board the John Bonadventure, Accra Road, I Feb. 1681/2 Yesterday about 4 in the afternoon wee came to anchor in this roade, and did feare wee should not have an oppertunity to send a letter ashoare , which might advise you of aJJ transactions here, but Mr P ley and Mr Towgood comeing aboard, did resolve to give you an account of the incouragement Captain Woodfine gives us in our business , who (by his words) wee very much feare bath some underhand dealing with Petly Wybourne and Mr Wendover, 78 and are confident he will doe us no good, and (it may be) all the hurt he can. If wee had goods in our hands whereby wee might have made interest with the Blacks, it wou ld have been much better, for we have little or noe hopes of getting any thing out of Mr Wendovers bands, and unJess your Worship doe speedily sen<l downe one of the vessells with supply the Company concernes at Arda may wholy be ruined, Mr Wendover being informed of our comeing by a canoe that went from aboard Captain John Woodfine some houres before our arrival!. Wee most earnestly desire your Worship to be speedy in sending, for Captain Woodfine swears Mr Smith shall not have the canoe, unless he paies him 11 ounces of gold, having paid the money himselfe for the Company use. Wee shall upon all occasions doe the best we can, and send advice by all oppertunities. [John Woodfine proceeded to Offra, where he was reported to be 'ready to sail' in March 1682 (no.483).] The Allapeen, Commander Danie l Gates [Gates was at Anomabu on 11 Jan. 1682 (no.505).) 611. Daniell Gates Aboard the Allapeen, Anishan Road. 1 Feb. 1681/2 I have gott aboard from Anishan 135 chests come and there is about 15 chests more ashoare which I intend to fetch of tomorrow morning in my skif, and that is all I am like to gett here.79 I intend to fall down to Anamaboe tomorrow in the afternoon. I would desire you would be pleased to send me downe what course sletias, clouts and brawles you can spare me, for I have bought but 2 slaves since I came, and I want those things to put of those goods that I have aboard, or elce I am likely to lye here a great while for a few slaves. I hope you will consider of it. [By 12 Feb. 1682, Gates had taken in 215 chests of com from Anashan (no.175).] 612. Daniell Gates Aboard the Allapeen, Anamaboe Road, 18 Feb. 1681/2 I have received yours by Captain Hills boat, and John Nevin in irons, and according to your order I have sent up your irons in Captain Hills boat , and have put on him a paire of our owne, and doe desire to know how long I must keep him in irons.80 I have gott but 23 chests of come from Anamaboe as yett and slaves are very scarce. [Gates now went west to Komenda, where he took in com on 20 Feb. 1682 (no.60), before proceceding east to Adangme.J 613. Daniell Gates Allampo, 6 March 1681/2 Haveing this oppertunity I make bold to trouble you with two or three lines to acquaint you I am now riding at Allampo. Here is 2 Portugueze more and 2 inter.lopers. The Frenchmen went from hence on Satureday last. Negroes are very hard to be gott and att very great rates, for the Frenchmen has cleared the towne of slaves, they haveing a great many booges. 81 Here is nothing goes off att present but musketts, and I could wish all my pintados was in musketts, for I cannot sell one nor doe know what to do with them. I have bought but 8 Negroes since I came here, for they doe aske after the rate of a bendy and better a head for a man slave. I would desire you if you have any oppertunity to send mee some musketts in the roome of my pintados, for there is nothing but musketts and booges goe off here. 614. Daniell Gates Aboard the Allepeen, 17 March 1681/2 These are to acquaint you that I am now under saile, I haveing purchased as many slaves here as with those I had before makes the number of 156 Negroes, and I have left my remaines with Mr Charles Towgood, the Master of your briganteen ,82 and have taken his receipt, the remaines being 16 Guynea clouts. [Gates proceeded to Whydah, where he arrived on 20 March 1682 (no.483).) The Arcanie Merchant, Commander Thomas Attwell 615. Thomas Attwell From aboard the Arcanie Merchant, 15 Apr. 1682 These are to Jett your honour understand that wee fell in with Cape Mount 83 the 8th of March and that now praised be God wee are safe auived off Commenda, with great part of our cargoe, finding tradeing to be very dull to windward, hopeing that I may find amendment for itt here. As for Negroes and come none to be gott att any rates, haveing in all my time of trade purchased but one Negroe, hopeing that you [sic: = they?] may be plenty below for interlopers are soe thick that there is noe getting any thing there without a man gives twice the vallue. 616. Thomas Attwell Anamaboe Road, 25 Apr. 1682 These are to informe you that I have had come profered mee, but their price is soe high that I am afraid to deale without your honours advice. They doe aske mee 3 augles per chest but I beleeve I may beat them downe to 2., which is the interlopers price and they are corned in a short time, soe it is my opinion that if your honour hath thoughts of corning mee with olde come I beleeve you must give the interlop.ers price, if not more. However I desire that you would be pleased to give mee your order, which I shall observe. 617. Thomas Attwell Anamaboe Road, 28 May 1682 These are to Jett your Worship understand that here is very little come offers as yett, and the rates that your Worship and Councill hath sett on the goods that I have to purchase come and slaves the Negroes will not meddle with them nor sell slaves alt the rates as your Worship hath limitted, and for come they doe desire gold as well as goods . Therefore I doe desire of your Worship and Counci ll how to act, for I have been a considerable time on the account of getting come and slaves already, which your Worship is very sencible of, and I am afraid that I must be forc't to buy my come with gold and put the most pa.it of my goods ashoare. [Attwell proceeded to Adangme, where he arrived on 1.8 June 1682 (no.512, 528), and was at Whydah in August (no.487, inclosure 2). His safe arrival in Barbados was reported back to West Africa in the fo llowing year (no.6).J The St George, Commander Richard Shepherd [The St George was rumoured to be west of Komenda in February J682 (no.58). Shepherd took in corn at Anomabu on 28-29 May (no.274). He presumably went from there to Cape Coast (cf. no.272); but he was back at Anomabu by 3 June, when he delivered a letter there (no.275).J 618. Richard Shepheard Aboard the St George, Annamaboe Road , 4 June 1682 Yours I have received of this same date by my chirurgeon, wherein you doe desire my company up to Capo Corsoe Castle. I would willingly have waited on your Worship but I have been very ill ever since l came last downe with a strong feavour, but I hope the voiolence of itt is over, for itt begins to breake out in my lips. As for my dispatches I desire your Worship would be pleas'd to send them downe by the bearers[?]. As for the child Letitia Croxton, if you please to send her alsoe downe with her effects by my boate with one of your owne people with her I will here signe to your obligation, provided itt oblidges mee to keepe her no longer then till shee be of age to provide for herselfe if itt run to the age of twenty, provided she doe not contract marriage before that time. I have received noe woeman slave upon her account as yett. I hope your Worship will be pleased to send the 2 slaves downe in my boate, soe craveing your Worships pardon I cannot waite upon you. 619. Richard Shepheard Aboard the St George , 6 June 1682 This inclosed is one I writt you of the 4th instant att receipt of yours by my Docter and I expected to have sent my boate up that night, but you are very sencible that wee have noe oppertunity of good weather and itt is very uncertaine when wee shall have any faire weather, and for my comeing I dare not venture, as not being well. Soe if your Worship pleases to send my dispatches and what else you please by Captain Shears, for I understand he is a comeing downe, and if your Worship sends any body downe with the child I will endeavour to send them up againe in my boate. [Shepherd proceeded to Whydah , where he arrived on 20 June 1682 (no.492).] 84 620. Richard Shepheard [Guydah], 5 July 1682 Thes e bearers is Captain Starlands canoemen, whoe were not able to gett aboard their ship, their canoe being broake, and I passing Allampo in the night could not put them aboard, whoe was constrain'd to take their passage with mee to Guydah, where I have pwáchased all my slaves in 14 day's and now am ready to saile. I have left the remaines with Mr John Winder, 85and reffering you to his letters I take leave. Unidentified ship, Commander Richard North [North was at Anomabu, where he delivered goods , on 6 July 1682 (no.282).] 621. George Bathurst Annamaboe, 16 July 1682 Captain North being very weake, hee desired mee to acquaint your Worship that hee hath received from Mr Richard Thelwall what come hee hath , which is but 76 chests,86 whereas your Worship promised him his whole complement of 500 chests att his first arrivall here, which I suppose might have been procured had not your Worship stinted Mr Thelwall to buy att a lower rate then other men have. And now the interlopers have bought up almost all, soe that there is noe probabillity of getting soe much old come here as will serve for the voyage. Therefore his desire is that your Worship will supply him some other way with old come, or else send an order that hee may have 50 chests more added to what you have already ordered , by reason of his long stay here, to have the new come well cured, and likewise below to procure the rest of his slaves will with what hee hath already be the occasion of expending much come upon the coast, which hee leaves to your Wor.ships consideration. 622. Richard North Annamaboe , 5 Aug. 1682 God be praised I am in pretty good health and faire way of recovery. I give you many thanks for my beere. I have now on board 300 chests of come, and fetch itt as fast as they on shore drie itt. I have consulted all the ways I can immagine and cannot find the cargoe I have for Arda sufficient for the purchaseing of my comple.ment of 450 slaves. May itt please your honour to order some ogmentation to my cargoe , for if any thing remaines itt shaJI be certainly left in the hands of them you have ordered itt to. The reason of my being soe urgent upon you is because I would not goe off the coast dead fraigted. 623. Timothy Armitage Anamaboe, 5 Aug. 1682 Yours of the 31st past have received, and shall as oppertun ity presents keepe you advised as well from Arda as from hence, 87 God sending us safe thithe r, being very sollicious (which shall be attended with the best of my care and dilligence) for the interest of the Royall Affrican Company there, whome I shall likewise hold advised from time to time as occasion serves, for the promotion of whose interest, humbly begg your Worship would please to take into consideration for a supply of some booges (as may be thought meet) to goe along with mee, for that Captain North tells mee shall fall short of goods whe reby to purchase his slaves. And moreover if your Worship would please to consider the bad or ill circumstances I may there be under for want of them, as comeing a stranger into the place. And itt may probably soe happen that what already consign'd Mr Winder or myselfe may goe towards the compleating of Captain Norths complement of slaves, when shall be incappaci.tated to doe the Company that service which otherwise I might doe. And itt is likewise feared that neither the sletias nor the beads will goe off alone. I humbly desire the perticulars of their cost for my better government in their disposa.11, because doe understand that the sletias are high prized goods and of severa11 rates. Captain North may in 5 or 6 day's be dispatcht from hence, haveing in about 300 chests of come aboard. 624. Richard North Annamaboe, 9 Aug. 1682 After a months tarry tomorrow God willing shall have all my come in, and this weeke doe intend to saile. I make bold to trouble you , if have any service to command pray advise. The time I have waited for come as you are sencib le has been a great detr iment to mee and rest of my owners. As for what I writt to you in my last, but not answered, to desire your Worship to grant mee some ogmentation to my cargoe, which if you please to consider will be noe disadvantage to the Royall Company nor you. [North proceeded to Whydah, which he left on 26 September 1682 (no.487). He was reported to have arrived safe in Barbados, and thence to Jamaica, around January 1683 (no.6); but was subsequently reported taken by pirates in the West Indies (no.633).] Unidentified ship,88 Commander Robert Ware 625. Robert Ware Anamaboe, 2 1 Aug. 1682 These are to lett you understand that this morning ear ly I began to take a part of my corne aboard and hope may gett off 200 chests this day, and if the weather continue in 3 dayes or 4 att most to have all on board. I am afraid that the quanitity of come your Worsh ip hath ordered Mr Thelwall to deliver mee will fall short of my expec.tation, and therefore desire your Worships speedy order for 50 more. 89 I am much afraid that Mr Richards will faile of his prom ise as to a canoe; for I understand that his people went to fetch her out of the woods but on Thursday last, but how long shee may be getting downe to the waterside is not yett knowne. 90 Hee informs[?] his people shee will be up in 3 dayes but itt is doubted by most people here. If hee come not according to his promise wee shall endeavour to purchase one here , which if procured will come att noe less price then a pound of gold, but she is a large canoe, therefore I earnestly begg your Worships advice by the first. The 3 vessells which were to Jeward are now in sight and suppose may gett into the road to day. I hope to see your Worship about Fryday next God permitting. [Ware had completed his coming at Anomabu by 23 August 1683, and was due to sail from there, to Cape Coast, on 30 August (nos 290, 292). He subsequently proceeded to Whydah, where was reportedly 'upon departure ' by 28 October 1682 (no.488), but did not actually leave until 3 December (no.490).] The Golden Fortune, Commander Lott Ambrose 626. Lott Ambrose [Annamaboe], 13 Sept. 1682 Yours received by the bearer this day att noone with 9 letters more inclosed, which shall take care to deliver according to instructions. I have not as yett gott above two thirds of my come aboard, because Mr Thelwall could not assist mee before todaye with his canoe.91 I hope I may be ready to saile on Fryday next. I have spoken to Mr Thelwall about my canoe but find noe probabillity to be furnished with staying 8 or IO day's and if soe can be upon noe certainety. Therefore desire your honour to send your orders downe to Mr Thelwall to furnish mee with his canoe; and if not furnished here with a canoe may be a great means towards the ruining of my voyage . I am confident if have any long stay upon the coast, as in all probabi llity I shall, I must want come if your honour orders noe more, and if soe when come to the Islands must putt the Company to a greate deale of charge to be furnished there. This thought good to informe your honour, desireing answer by him that accom.pany's the bearer. [PS] I desire your honour to send a receipt for the chest of wine and caske of mum, includeing the cheese and firkin of butter. 627. Lott Am brose [Annamaboe ], 15 Sept. 1682 Yours came into my hands last night, and as to the canoe that Mr Thelwall hath which your honour thinks wil1 be to bigg, as I beleive few goeth with lesser. ltt would have been far from my thoughts to write to your Honour concerning Mr Thelwalls canoe if a lesser could have been any wayes produced. I have made all the inquiry I can here, and from Lague have notice there is noe less then a 11 hand canoe to bee had there, and to goe downe without one will be verry uncertaine of being furnished there, for every man will serve himselfe first in such cases, and besides because of the abundance of shipping that I suppose to lye there now, I shall not make too much hast downe to the factory if can find any prospect without any long stay on this side of itt to be furnished. As to my come, of the complement that that you ordered Mr Thelwall to deliver mee there is about 6 chests lost, the canoe sinking goeing off. I desire that you would be pleased to order that to be made good. [PS] Pray be pleas'd to send a receipt for the cheste of wine and caske of mum, because certainly the Company will question the delivery of itt, although you doe acquaint them in your letters. Be pleas'd to send speedy answer because I intent to saile tonight. [Ambrose had completed his coming at Anomabu by 16 Sept. and left there on 18 (nos 295-6). He proceeded to Whydah, which he left in October 1682 no.488).) The Ma,y, Commander Henry Nurse [Nurse arrived at Sekondi on 5 July 1682 (no.73). He was later at Anomabu, from where he sailed on 29 August (no.292).] 628. Henry Nurse From aboard the Mary, Accra Road, 1 Oct. 1682 Yours I received bearing date the 29th September, and glad to he are of your honours health. I have aboard about 210 slaves. I have been to leward of Accra some 4 leagues but now rideing att Accra, and as soone as my sloope comes up from Allam po I shall make all the hast I can up to Cabo Corsoe, for my time growes short as to charter party, but I may stay longer if I think fitt for the Companys advantage, which will be chargeable to the owners if I should stay longer. I hope to make up 300 Negro's before Igoe off the coast.92 As for your hoggs and goates I will bring up what Mr Hassell will put on board mee. [Nurse was back at Anomabu , taking in com, on 19 October 1682 (no.304). His safe arrival in Barbados was reported in the following year (no.6).] Unidentified ship, Commander Andrew Branfill (second voyage) [Branfill was at Mina on 28 November 1682 (no.533); off Shama on 5 De.cember (no.547) . He subsequently took in com, as reported in this letter, probably at Anomabu.] 629. Andrew Branfill No date [Dec. 1682) Yours of the 16th instant I received, and as to the come when you see my charter party you will be better satisfied. I hope by the latter part of this week I shall be ready to draw an exact account of my remaines , which I suppose will be sayes, perpetuano's , iron, Guyney stuffs, broad allejars, tallow, lead, musketts , Welch plains, manillo's, and paper bralls, which if you please to take and give mee 25 per cent advance they will be yours, if not I must dispose of them as well as I can. [Branfill was report ed to be on the point of departure from Anomabu on 2 January 1683 (no.314); and was at Accra later in the same month (no .446) . Unident ified ship, Commander William Maple 630. William Maple Caho Corsoe Castle, 15 Jan. I 682/3 I doe acknowledge to have received from the Agent Generali and Councill one man slave (in leiw of a man slave that ran away from on board my ship) with this condition, that if the said slave be not retaken I doe hereby oblige myselfe to make satisfact ion to the Royall Affrican Company for the slave received by mee from the Castle, as wittness by hand William Maple Junior Wittness William Pley [Maple left Anomabu on 16 January 1683, bound for Angola (no.317).] TheLisbon Merchant, Commander William Woolliford [Woolliford was at Anomabu, 20-23 March 1683, landing goods and taking in com (nos 326, 327, 329.329).J 631. WiJiiam Williford [Guydah], 9 May 1683 This is to acquaint you that the canoemen have been att Mr Winders 93 command ever since I have been here and not att mine. When I had any occasion for them to carry my slaves off I was faine to come capp in hand to them with a greate many faire words, and their crye was they should displease Mr Winder, and now they are with you requite them as you think fitt . Mr Winder is now out of your reach and hee will doe what he lists. 632. William Williford [Guydah], 9 June 1683 This is to acquaint you of my condition and of Mr Winders kindness to mee, whoe made mee lye 5 weeks without any slaves and hath strived to sett the King and all the Cabasheers against mee what he could, and hath endeavoured to ruin and destroy mee and my ship ever since I have been here; and when Captain Lowe and Captain Rickard came downe hee bid mee shift for my selfe and gett slaves where I could, for I shou ld have noe trade here if itt lay in his power to prevent mee , Captain Lowe and Captain Rickard bringing gold downe with them if in case their cargo's should not hould out, and they were men for him, but I haveing none was forct to shift for my selfe. 94 May the 16th the pyrates came downe and tooke our ships about 5 a clock in the aftemoone, I being ashoare getting what slaves I could and 2 of my boates man'd and gon to windward seeing to purchase what slaves they could, but the pyrates interrupted them of their designe for they tooke them and sunk the boates and all the goods. The same day the ships were taken 12 hours after I received a letter per a canoe but then itt was too late, but if I had received itt 12 houres before I had saved all the gold which is now lost. The next day I went aboard of the pyrate and with much adoe I gott my ship, but their intents were to bumc them all. They tooke away one ankor and cable from mee, and all my bread and most of my beefe, and destroy'd most of my water caske and every thing that I had aboard. 95 I have now 306 slaves aboard and doe intend to say le a Saturday if wind and currant present. Mr Winder owes mee 18 ounces of gold and I cannot gett one cracra of itt. [Woolliford departed Whydah early in June 1683. 96 He was at Principe by 22 June (no.639).) The Hopewell, Commander Richard Lumley [Lumley arrived at Cape Coast Castle on 1 May 1683 (no.334), and was intended to go on to Anomabu for corn (no.337). But on 11 May his ship was attacked and plundered by pirates off Anashan (no.556). David Harper was a local employee of the RAC ( chief factor at Komenda earlier in 1683) who (as explained in no.633) went on board Lum ley's ship after this incident.) 633. David Harper From aboard the Hopewell, 15 May 1683 I came this evening aboard of Captain Lumley, whoe I found under saile off Amersa and is now up with Anishan, and I hope tomoJTow shall be in Cabo Corsoe Reade. The Capta in is wounded in the 1ight shoulder but there is good hopes of his recov .ery. The Royall Companys concerns are nothing embazeled, only the sayes and sheets hee had from Cabo Corsoe are taken away. They conjecture the pyrate is [blank], for they came from the Westlnd ias and carry's a ship of30 gunns and 150 men of all nations. They tooke Capta in Norths ship before they came from the Indias, and have taken several] of good vallue since they came upon the coast. His seacond was a Dutch interloper of 24 gunns they tooke to windward, and they had of him 70 Mk in gold, and have given him Captain Thompsons ship with both interlopers cargo's for a recompense, for the pyrates covett only gold and sayes, they will have the Companys gold they understand is att Arda if itt costs their lives. Captain Lumley presents his humble service to your honour and the rest of the Councill, desireing your honour will please to send offDocter Meade to search his wound, which his owne Docter cannot well doe, being hurt in the thumb. They have robbed Captain Lumley and all his folks of all their owne conce rns and the ships furniture and provisions, soe that hee is in a verry low condition. Hee desires Docter Meade may be off with speede and bring off with him a case of lancetts and a douzen of fowles. 634. David Harper From aboard the Hopewell, 16 May 1683 Captain Lumley heartily thanks your honour for your care in sending of Docter Meade, whoe hath searched his wound and wilJ give your honour an account of his personal! estate. The Captain saies they have left him one sett of sailes att the yards which are verry old, haveing been two voyages upon the coast before and are now soe much damnified with shott that they will not carry him off the coast, wherefore hee earnestly desires your honour would lett him know by the first what you please to command him, the Royall Company's cargoe for slaves being nothing embazled. Your honours commands are humbley desired. [Lumley took in com at Anomabu on 29 May 1683 (no.346). He proceeded to Whydah, where he arrived on 22 June 1683 (no.494), and from which he depa11ed with his complemen t of 260 slaves in July.97 Lumley himself died en route to Cape Lopes, which his ship reached in August (no.639).) The Seven Oaks, Commander Thomas Pearson [Pearson was reported west of Komenda on 12 April 1683 (no.107), and was a victim of the attack by pirates, who captured his attendant boat, off Anashan on 11 May (no.343). He was subsequently at Accra, 22 July (no.464), and arrived at Alampo on 5 August 1683 (no.544). As is explained in this letter, Pearson had been Agent-General at Cape Coast in the l 660s (for the Company of Royal Adventurers Trad ing into Africa, the precedessor of the RAC), and had presumably been requested to give his evidence regarding rival Dutch and English claims to certain places on the coast.] 635. Thomas Pearson From aboard the Seven Oakes, 22 May 1683 Yours of the 7th cmrnnt came safe to my hand by Mr Shears. I am veITy glad to heare of your health, which God continue and send you safe to England where, since it cannot conveniently be here, I hope I may have the Honour of your com.pany. In the interim soe neare as I can remember concerning Agga Annamaboe etc. are as followeth. In June 1667 I arrived att Cabo Corsoe Castle, att which time wee had warr with the Dutch , then finding Agga demolisht and in said wan-Annamaboe deserted,98 and being courted by the natives of both places to settle, finding them to be much for the Companys intere st did send whitemen and house slaves to both places. Some time after I had severall threatnings from the Dutch that if I did not deliver the possession of the said places, they would gaine them by force of armes. That not takeing effect in grcate grandure they protested; that was answered; still they protested, in protesting three times, and at last [we] not submitting to their threatnings, Dirick Willree the Generall 99 made an offer to remitt the differance to the King of England and their States, which I submitted to and sent all my papers relateing .to that differance to the Royall Company and the Company presented them to his Majestie in Councill. William Temple was then goeing into Holland on some other state affaires and his Majestie gave him to understand how ill hee resented the illegall proceedin gs of their Agents abroad. The Embassadour att his arrival) in Holland made knowne his Majesties pleasure in that particular to the States Generali , whoe immediately commanded the West India Company that they should give orders to their Agents, in noe hostile manner to disturb what interest the English nation was possestofin the time ofwarr, and from the Royall Company I had express commands not to relinquish a foot of ground that were then possest of, and from that time till this present I never had any dispute therein. In [16)68 from Succondee, Asshume and the Cabosheers sent downe and desired that our nation might settle att that place. I found by severall ships that had been there itt was a place verry considerable for trade and verry good landing, on which I sent Captain Cockram and another Whiteman with some quantity of goods, they stayed 8 or 10 day 's, and left some of our black servants in charge of the goods, whoe sold considerab le quantityes and were from time to time supplyed with what the trade required. Some of our factors every 10 or 14 dayes were there, and Asshume had the Companys flagg. The Dutch then nor before ever had any settlement or people att that place. All Dicki scove wee found greate conveniency for come, wood and water, especially in time of watT with the Dutch, whereupon I made a contract with Dick 100 that for every ship that wooded, watered and com'd att that place hee should have one perpettuanoe and one anchor of brandy, and for demanding the same I gave him a paper under my hand, and sent him a flagg , noe Dutch ever haveing had any pretentions to that place. If anything I have in my ship be serviceable to you pray with all freedome command itt. The Eaglet, Commander John Waugh [Waugh was reported at Cape Coast on 22 March 1683 (no.437), and took in com at Anomabu on 17 April 1683 (no.329). He had been intended to go to Whydah, 101 but, as here explained, did not in the event do so.) 636. John Waugh St Thoma, 5 June 1683 Haveing this oppertunity thought good for to give you an account of my safe arrivall here to this port for to water, haveing gotten my complement of Negro's upon the Coast of Arda in 12 dayes to windward of Guydah near 15 Jeagues. 102 Wee have here the bad newes of the coast, for here is 2 ships that were taken by the pyrate and the men of 2 ships more in them, the one Captain Anthony Wilding , an inter .loper, whoe hath on board the men of a small ship that did attend on Agent Pearson, the other is a Pinke from Rotterdam that hath the men of another interloper of 24 guns belonging to Flushing , whome they all tooke to windward of Cape Trespoin.tas. I have alsoe left neare one third of my cowries and some pautkaes and some long cloaths that came damnified from the Castle and some chercolees, which I would have sent you by this oppertun ity but feareing they may miscarry by those pyrates doe resolve to carry them home. This day, God willing, doe intend to saile for Barbado's. The Merchants Bonadventure, Commander John Lowe (second voyage) [Lowe was at Accra, where he landed goods, on 20 February 1683 (no.391); at Komenda on 27 March (no.104); and atAnomabu, taking in com, on 20-24 April (nos 33 I, 333).] 637. John Lowe [Guydah], l O June 1683 I am sorry I am forct to give you this sad account of our misfortune att this place, for the 16th of May past about 5 in the evening came down 2 pyrates, the one of 28 guns the other of 24, which ship shee tooke on the coast to windward and man'd out of his ship. The admirall clapt our ship aboard and after fireing many broad sides and valleys of small shott supprized our ship, the slaves on the deck 150 and my caske to c1eare my hold. Come with the King's jack, ensigne and pennant, wounded 7 of my men, although they made no resistance. Entered 150 men. My mate cutt the cable, upon which hee cutt his and then laid her aboard upon the luff, att which time my people yeilded the ship. Captain Rickards his people cutt their cable and loosed the fore topsaile and put to the shoare, but before shee came ashoare, quited the ship, tooke out the gold and lett the ship and slaves drive ashoare, the which is lost and not one thing saved out of her. Captai n Woollifords men quited their ship and left their gold aboard, the which the pyrates found all the next morning and an English woeman and the cooke. Att this action Captain Rickards, Woolliford and my selfe in the country purchaseing our slaves, which Woolliford might have had his slaves long before but much disobliged the blacks, though hee raised the price of booges att least IO pounds in a slave, and told the Blacks that I was comeing downe which made them keepe their slaves for mee, which I had 150 aboard and 150 ashoare, but not goods ashoare to pay for them, and I was to be dispatcht in 9 dayes more had this not happened , but now my ship is soe much disabled that I feare shall hardly carry her to the lndias, all my low masts shott, soe that all the fishes and provisions I can make will hardly hould, all but 3 shrouds on one mast and 5 on the other gon, my foremast shott; [they have] taken all my sailes, good provisions, cordage, arrnes and powder with aJI my cl oaths, gold and what was proper for them as they thought of the Company goods, as allejars, chercolees, pintado's, attlases, muzlin; and what booges on my deck and in my boate to goe ashoare, which was 6 caske, [they) throwes overboard. The next day they seized all my officers to the gunnell to shoote to death to confess for more gold, but only shott my gunners mate to death, and the other which was prevented by the English pyrates that was aboard, otherwise all the rest had dyed. Captain Rickards hath used much dilligence in looking after his gold, which was carried by his men and boate to Ofra aboard the Flemings, but broake open and greate part of itt divided amongst them, and on the news to the Flemings two of them weighed and most of his men gon with them. Hee hath gotten part of it againe and 28 marks sent home to the Company per Captain Woolliford, who sailed 2 dayes since. I have now 423 slaves on board on the Companys account and 25 on my mens account , for when the pyrate had quited the ship and had watered his ship out of her, my men desired him to give them something towards their loss , upon which bee gave them my ship, goods and slaves for their owne proper use, and ordered them that if I agreed to itt they should fire 7 gunns, if not att 8 the next morning hee would come aboard and burne her, upon which the next morning they demanded my ship, goods and slaves and to gett her to St Thoma and sell her and divide the money. I answered that itt was not in my power to give nor theirs to receive, but if they would goe about their business and refitt the ship I would find out some way to consider their loss, upon which I told them I would gett creditor for 25 slaves and send for the Factor off, whoe should allow itt and give the Company an account , and that I beleeved 25 slaves would make good all their, loss and desired them to consider whether or noe that was not a safer way, then to be like the pyrates , upon which after many disputes they fired 7 guns, and after the man of warr weighed after haveing been here 4 dayes, soe that I sent for Mr Winder aboard and satisfied him of the thing and hee told them hee would assist them with a letter to the Company to that purpose, upon which they went to worke and in 12 day's time I gott my ship in a pretty good condition and went ashoare againe. In which time Captain Woolliford bought all his slaves but how many I cannot tell. His ship was only taken by 3 prisoners which the pyrate sent aboard and brought the White woeman and the cooke and all the gold aboard. Hee saith hee hath Jost greate quantity of goods, but I am sure he hath much abused Mr Winder and pretends all that goods that you sent downe to his factory is lost, and had not Captain Rickards and my brother Woolman left him [= Winder] something could not have supported. Hee hath been veny dilligent in getting part of Captain Rickards gold and my slaves, and now recovered of his sickness very serviceable to the Company. The people of this place are verry kind to him and hee obliges them well, but itt is my opinion that if you doe not send for the time forward as many ships to Ophra as this place the Companys trade will be spoyled, for after our loss when wee brought the remaines of goods ashoare the blacks plundered as well as the pyrates and could gett no satisfaction of them, and the people of Ophra att this time doe promise that if you will send ships there wee shall have a good trade, and I well know there the prizes are settled and 20 per cent less then here, for they grow upon every ship here, soe that if you think convenient to Jett Mr Winder goe there and order a seacond or more to that factory and 2 or 3 to this, the two places will strive to outvey the one the other. Your advice to us came 12 houres after our ships was taken, and they stayed by the way att a place called Abrew, some 18 leagues to windward of this place, where Captain Wyborne was getting of slaves for Captain Booth, 103 and that they went on board Captain Booths ship, which gave the pyrate notice that they were a canoe for advice , upon which the pyrate weighed after them and outsailed, otherwise might have had 24 houres notice, for itt was the 17th day of May they came down and your letter of 5 dayes date. If my brother Thompson and brother Collins be with you pray remember my love to them and tell them I would have them goe home, for their ship and goods is given to the merchant of the greate Fleming the pyrate tooke, and about 2,000 pounds worth of goods more, and that the merchant promis'd mee to goe for Holland and that he would send the ship and her concerns for England to the owners. [Lowe left Whydah on 19 June (no.494); he was later at Cape Lopes, from which he departed on 23 July I 683 (no.639).) Unidentified ship, Commander Robert Bell [Bell was at Sekondi on 11 July 1683 (no.9).) 638. Robert Bell Commenda, 7 Aug. 1683 Yours of the 7th instant received, and the cargoe of 1905 pounds, 2 shillings and 3 pence is the windward cargoe consigned to mee, wherein the owners are concern'd 560 pounds. I have alsoe an Ardra cargoe on board but noe other. Captain Phenney's cargoe your Worship is satisfied that itt was safe received on board his owne ship, and that was all the cargoes I tooke in and those 3 cargo's I sign'd bills of loading for. I never mett with such dull trade in my life, goods beares noe price. I have on board mee att this time about 120 sayes, and as for our perpetuano's they were verry badly sorted and about two thirds green in each baile besides two redds. I have bought but 7 chests of come. I intend to come downe with the ship God willing 5 or 6 dayes hence. In our windward cargoe I had 20 barrells of powder and that is all sold. [Bell passed Accra without stopping in September (no.469), and proceeded to Whydah, from which he departed in October I 683. '04] The Jacob, Commander Thomas Woolman [Woolman took in corn at Anomabu on 24 April 1683 (no.333).] 639. Thoma s Woolman On board the Jacob Pink att St Thoma, 25 Aug. 1683 This comes per Captain Smith, a Dutch Ship belonging to the Mina, to informe you of my proceedings. May the first I came downe to Guydah. What has happened since, till the 14th day of June ditto, I referr you to my brother Lowes and Mr Winders letter, 105 which day my brother and I sailed and the 22nd ditto wee come to Princes, 106 where wee found Captain Woolliford. The Governour plaid the knave with my brother and I verry much, for hee would not suffer my brother to buy any refreshment untill I had paid a slave custome. The 29th ditto I saild in company with my brother and that night parted with him, and the 8th of July I came into the Gabboone , 107 and the Prince came aboard of mee from a small island 108 and 7 more men, and shewed mee a letter from Captain Anthony Weil den which informed mee that the Prince and the natives were verry civil!. I sent a man ashoare while they was aboard, and hee came off and told mee that there was but one man more upon the island. They told mee that the island was the cheifest place of trade, and bid mee fire 2 gunns to give the country people notice. The next day they came aboard and brought a small parcel! of teeth and wax with them, which I bought att a reasonable rate, but they told mee I must not expect the trade to be open in less then 2 or 3 dayes . I intended to stay that time there, and then to goe fwther up the river. I thinking noe harme went ashoare with 3 men more, they treaded mee kindly att the first, but after I had been ashoare about 2 hourse, att my comeing away they panyard mee and all the men and beate and cutt us verry much , wee all looking for nothing but death. After a small time [we asked] why they did soe, they answered that they must have all my slaves and goods, 109 and that an English ship had been there and burnt their towne and kill'd 2 men and carryed off 13 more. I told them that the goods were none of mine and that I could not give them away, but I seeing that here was about a l 00 people upon the island that was come over from the maine in a small time, fear'd that they would goe and take the vessell, there being noe more then my mate and one man and a boy aboard . I sent for the slaves and 40 iron barrs and a bunch of beades, but I haveing neither pen nor paper my mate mistooke and seat a chest of beades. After these goods were ashoare, for when they came first aboard I shewed them all my goods, they would have my powder and musketts, kettles, pintado's, booges, soe I sent for 10 kettles, 10 pintado's, 30 musketts, barrell of powder, 3 plaines. After this they would have all the teeth that I bought of them and wax and severall other small things , and after they had kept mee 24 houres, they Jett mee goe. I staid three dayes att the rivers mouth to see if I could gettany Negro's off there, but could not. The 21st ditto I came to an anchor att Cape Lopas, where I found my brother Lowe, Captain Booth and Captain Howe and a Fleming bound for Angola to take in 500 slaves. My brother and Captain Rickards was verry well but has mett with a greate mortallity with his slaves. The 23rd ditto my brother sailed. There is noe trade, for the Negro's sayes that here has been 30 or 40 saile of ships within this 3 months .110 They told mee that the privateere were here 6 weeks past with 7 saile in company with him. The 25th ditto there came one Captain Serjant that came out of the Bite, and he inform'd mee that Captain Davis was dead and a greate many of his men, and that hee had but 50 slaves in when hee came away. This Serjant is an interloper and was panyard att the Gabboones 9 dayes before mee, and that they made him pay to the vallue of 150 pounds in teeth and goods , before they lett him goe, upon which Captain How and I agreed to goe downe againe to see if I could recover satisfaction. The 26th wee sailed and mett Capta in Clarke, but wee put him to a greate deale of charge, for hee tooke us to be the pyrate . Captain Thompson has tooke his passage upon Captain Howe. The 22nd [sic] ditto I came to an anchor att the rivers mouth and went up the river in Captain Howe. The 30th ditto the Prince and about 30 people more came aboard, and after they had been a small time aboard I came in sight and wee panyard the Prince and 8 men more and killed and wounded 10, and the rest leap'd over board. We kept then 6 dayes and I have gott all my owne slaves and part of my goods, but could not possibly gett all by reason of itt's being distributed up in the country, but I have gott 4 slaves and 160 weight of teeth besides my own teeth for the goods and wee lett the Prince and 2 more goe. The 11th of August I came to an anchor att Cape Lopas againe, where I found Captain Lumley's pink, but hee has been dead this 15 dayes. They have a parcell of verry good slaves and has buried but 2 since they came off the coast. The 13th ditto waid againe and the 17th ditto came unto St Thoma, where Captain How and I was clapt in prison under the pretence of our selling goods and not paying the Kings custome, but I understand better since, for they would force Captain Howe to take his provisions of the Govemour and Captain and att what price they would, but I was quickly Jett out againe, but Captain Howe they made him come to their price. Since I have been here I understand there has been 2 Portugeeze taken at the Gabboones after the same manner as I was, one had 60 slaves and the other 9 and they tooke all from them both and then lett them goe. I hope to find a better trade att Sherbera 111 to make up my loss time. for neither att the Gabboones nor Cape Lopas is there any trade, soe I hope your honour will not think ill of [me]. [PS] Th.is day I think for to saile. Unidentifed ship, Commander Shilling Terry [As explained in this letter, this ship arrived in West Africa only by accident, having been driven off course on a voyage to Madagascar.] 640. Shilling Terry Cabo Corsoe Roade , 3 Nov. 1683 I was when I came out from England absolutely bound for the Island St Lawrance, 112 but itt pleased God by the time I came into the !attitude of 11 degrees North (attitude I mett with the winds southerly and the raines likewise, which held us from that time per the winds, and them but small and currant that drove us upon this coast about 12 leagues to the westward of the River Cestus on the 17th July last and there lay att anchor till the 7th October , where I Jost 21 of my men and all the rest of us have been sick, my selfe hardly yett recovered, but itt pleased God by a small matter of green oranges and plantins wee have, all that are left which is 15 in number, through Gods mercye indifferant well upon our leggs , and now I am come downe heither to crave your assistance, our want being wood and water and some green things from the shoare, as fruitt, cabages or sallating for the further proceeding a through cure for us, and if possible that you could spare by any meanes 4 or 5 men to helpe mee to carry our ship for Barbado's. 113 I came out in company of Captain Robert Bell. Your blackman asked mee ifl saw the Companys pink to windward, I have not seene her nor any other ship of the Companys , only your small ship that is gon up for Succondee. I have been sick from the 10th September, neither my selfe nor any one in the ship have ever been here in our lives. If a canoe comes off in the morning, I shall waite on you with all my heart. Th is being all I can acquaint you for present. 