IV ANOMABU The RAC factory atAn omabu ('Annamaboe') had been established in 1679.1It wasoccupied continuously through the period 1681-3; the same man, Richard Thel.wall, serving as chief factor there throughout. As is alluded to in this correspon.dence (no.242) the factory in 1681 was in the process of being fortified (with'flankers', or defensive earthworks). It was already known as Charles Fort; al.though Thelwall 's letters never use this name, it does appear in a letter written fromAnomabu by a visiting ship in 1682 (no.529). The factory supplied mainly gold,but also some slaves; it was also important for the provision of com to slave-ships,and served as a base for fishing for oyster shells (burned to produce lime forbuilding), at the sandbank off Amisa ('Amersa', 'Amessa') to the east.Anomabu , like Anashan to the west (and Egya to the east) belonged to the stateof Fante ('Fanteene'); hence the factory sent representatives to negotiate with 'theQuantrees and Braffo' at Fante (nos 215, 247-8), and the town's own chiefs wentto Fante to attend the celebra tion of 'their Christmas day' (no. 277). The hinterlandtraders, as at Anashan, were the Akani ('Arcanies') . Recurrently trade from theinterior to Anomabu was interrupted by Kabestera and other states in the immediateinterior associated with it (nos 268-9, 325, 358). 209. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 7 Feb. 1680/1 Last night I received yours, whereby I understand that one Allen an England inter.looper passed by Cape Corso. He is au an anchour att Agga, but shall have noecome their but what the Blackes send of, that l cante helpe theire. I have writte toMr Richardes to Annishan and shall take care that they shall bee secured till furtherorder if [they] come ashoare.2 By Mr Hassell I write your Honour what I had sentfor Annamaboe and thought itt not convenient for to take all att once because thepeople should not take any notice of itt. 210. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 11 Feb. 1680/1 This services cheifely for coverte to the inclosed accompt to the 29 January past, and allso a noate of what whitte men and Blackes, which hope will finde right and make noate accordingley. Captain Bowler hath 106 buttes shells, suppose may arrive Cape Corso this day. Captain Clarke will have all his come in this day. 211. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 13 Feb. 1680/1 Last night received yours and as to Gallantia, 3 indeed every body knowes hee is a great rogue, he left mee when Twas robbed when I beleeive might have told me of itt if [he) would. Hee owes Mr Belwooct4 3 slaves, which said would pay me but wonte. Itt was said [he) owede Captain Archer a greate deale of money, butt howe to prove itt I cante tell. He owes me one woeman and 8 angles, and Ottadadiqueene owes mee 4 ounces and Captain Peter 1 ounce and 2 angles. Butt truely I beleive itt is better nott for too meddle with him, for if should would not Jett the white man that is at Wyamba come away nor any of the goods their. Nay they wonte Jett a cannoe passe by for Accra or too Accra butt they will pannayer itt, and the cannoes must staye thiere goeing and commeing, soe of two evills a man ought for to chose the least. This morning Mr Franckla nd and Mr Winder went for Accra, Mr Winder beinge verry ill haveing a violent feavour. Last night came a shippe in to Annishan road, I suppose an interlooper, and their is two more shippes comeing downe, [I) shall take care that none come ashoare. Tllis morning Captain Clarke sett saile for Cape Corso. By the 15 hands cannoe have sent 35 chestes of come. 212 . Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 18 Feb. 1680/ I Last night I received yours, and according as in ordred have sent the two bricklayers Yankey and Coeampa. As too wood, I have none but what is to burne. What wood was att Aga is aboard Captain Clarke, I suppose may arrive Cape Corso this day. By first conveniency of cannoe shall send such wood as this place affords. As too the interloopers, theire is none in this roade butt two at Amessa and one att An.nishan, yett I cannot heare of any goeing ashoare. They give 7 pease 2 angles for a man slaves. [PS) I shall want 2 hogsheads of tarrise5 now, soe may please for to send it by first conveniency. 213. RichardThelwall Annamaboe, 20 Feb. 1680/1 Last night I received yours just as I came from Agga, 6 but Mr Hassell said nothingto mee. [I) had writte but that Captain Yanke/ was gone to Cape Corso. Yankey MrBelwood made Captain, a man not worth 2 pence and of noe repute. The Quarran.tcers man was with mee and asked mee if that Aga factory was to bee removed, andI told him no, but a white man or two for to bee theire as in Mr Belwoodes tyme.He said no more to me, he said nothinge of stoppinge a trade. Besides I told themjust before Mr Carter went away they brooke oppen the warehouse and tooke about a marks worth of longes and plaid the rogue when they pleased. 8 I have been here allmost 2 yeares and indeed all the gold comes by the way of Aga first, and eversince I have been att Annamaboe itt has been as much as I can doe to pay whittemen and Blacks. The charge is great and the other place gettes all the moneye . 214. Richard Thelwa ll Annamaboe, 25 Feb. 1680/1 This day Captain Bowler arrived here,9 and according as in ordered shall deliverwhat come he wants and what sheetes [you] have orderd to Mr Nightingale. ButtCaptain Bowler sayeth your Honour hath ordred some canvis for bagges, as yet seenone so desiers some a soonc as possible for the expeditione of his shippe awayfrom hence. Lickwisc shall deliver him what slaves I have. 215. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 28 Feb. 1680/1 This night I rece ived your[s] per Captai ne Yankey and according as in ordred shallsend a white man to the Quantrccs and Braffo. Itt will bee expiences, though shall goe as neare as possib le. Tomorrowe I hope Captain Bowler will have all his comea board. I take notice [you] will send a supply for Agga, I hope will not forgettAnnarnaboe. I have 27 sayes whitte, nay they are brooke n and noe body will buythem, if you please Mr Franckla nd cann informe you what they are. This comes bythe 15 hand and 4 hand cannoe, which bringes in all 15 buttes [i.e. of shells ], theygoe from hence when the winde is downe in the night. 216. Richard Tbelwall Annamaboa, 4 March 1680/1 This morninge earley Mr Franckland wentc for Accra, the day before being verryraine. I take notice should not send aney [person] to Fanteene, indeed it would have lost a great deale money. lncloosed is myne and Mr Hassells accompts, which hope will finde right and make noate accordingley This comes by the gunners mate in the 15 hand cannoe with 15 buttes of oyster shelles more, and allsoe the ballance of the accompts beinge in all 4oz OOa 4ta. [PS] l receeived per the 15 hand cannoe one ball of sayes and 2 hogsheads tarrise. Jncloosed is the receipts from Captain Bowler. 217. Richard Thelwall Anna ma boa, IO March 1680/1 Yesterday I received yours by the 15 hand cannoe, with IO barrills of powder, 19 broad tapp[s)ell[s) and I narrowe, 17 broad nicconees and 23 narrowe , and 50 blew pottkies. As to the over charged oyster shclles, some came to Annamaboa so their is no mistake as per Mr Hilliards inclosed noate appeares, which I paid and his charges, and thought he had acquainted your Honour before he went away. And as to the 4oz Sa for puttinge 700 and odde chestes of come a board shippes, I shall aske the white men for their tallies of each shippe and shall give you a more perticular accompt. As for the 35 chestes of come, itt was putt into the 15 hand cannoe, and if any be lost by the way I cante helpe itt. (lnclosed] An accompt att Amersa February the 4 1680/1 oz  a  t  The 4 hand cannoe 27 turns  0  7  3  The 5 hand cannoe 29 turns  10  4  The canoe men cankee money  0  6  0  For charges  0  11  6  ffor l 06 casks of shels  6  10  0  8  13  0 1  218. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 16 March 1680/1 Yours I received of the 14 instant by Mr Richardes. lnclosed is all the accompts writte for, and as to the blew baftas I never se[e) any such before , for they used to be as stiffe as a board. They sell att Succonde and to windward, I have sold them, shall use my endeavour to sell them. Inclosed is a noate of what gunns is here, I have but 10 great shott and they not halfe fittinge for these gunns but hope your Honour will spare me some, and allsoe some spunges and ladles for the gunns. I allso shall want some paper and incke. 219. Richard Thellwall Annamaboe, 25 March 1681 This comes by the 15 hand canoe, by which [you] have but 7 butts of oyster shells, the wather being very bad, and they lost 10 in 15. Yesterday the Captain of the Arcanjes brought me a pound of good gold for perpetuanoes, but I told him had none, soe [he] desired for to write to Cape Corsoe if had any. Per first good con.venience be pleased for to send some tapseeles, nicconces. Just now is come in thisroad a shipp, I suppose an interloper. 220. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 2 April 1681 Last rught by the 15 band canoe l received the goods mentioned, being safe ashorebut a little wette. As to the canoe going for oyster shells, the mans sone was here,and sayeth he would be paid for all the sheJls that should bee lost, and said it wouldbetter stay till after the raines and then send a shipp. lndeed they lost 10 in 15buttesthe last tyme, when sent but 7 in the great canoe, soe are unwilling to send any moretill better weather. By the 15 hand canoe have sent a bull, the best Thave, which is att your Honno urs service. As concerning the buying of 11, 9, 7 and five handcanoes I shall doe my indeavoure, but the cheapes t and best canoes are to be boughtup to windward atAxhim, and as to any canoes going to Alampo, 10theire will nonegoe till the raines be over. [PS] l wish your honnour a merry Easter; and many thanks for all favours, butunderstand the small poxe is verry much att Cape Corsoe, and I never had them,soe desire your pardon for not comeing this Easter. 221. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 6 April 1681 Yours of the 4th instant I received by Frances Nixson, and as for those people theywill neither send not sell their canoes. As to Captain Hoocomey [var. Hookeme],indeed he promised me to pay me the first time I came to Cape Corso, soe I was contented. By Captrun Peeter I nowe send Marches account, and alsoe the ballancebeing 11oz 14a 7ta, which hope will find right and make noate accordingly, and infewdaies sha ll send the copyes. As to the bull I hope your Honnour will be pleasedto except of. [PS] 1 desire to know the price of perpettuanes and sayes, for these people sayeththe price is something abated. 222. Rjchard Thelwall Annamaboe, 16 April 1681 Last njght I received yours, and as conce rning the charges prud the canoemen thegunners mate that came with them see me pay them, and they say they had but onedayes cankey when they came here. Inclosed is two months accompts more. I desireto know the prices of the red perpettuanoes and sayes. l want also ink and paper. [PS] Please to send by first good conveniance, som[e ] broad tapseels. 223. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, I 9 April 1681 This comes by one George Taylor, one that served the Company formerly. He came ashore at Aga; he is desirous to serve the Company againe if your honour pleaseth, he is a civill man and not given to drinking. Heere lyeth three interlopers, one Dutch and two English; and George Taylor sayeth that Mr Edlin and Mr Harvey is at Commenda, and one Richard Lumley, hee canne informe better. [PS) Please to send per first conven ience some broad tapseels and 4 or 5 bushells of sea coales for the smith to mend the [h)inges and bolts about the fort, for all is gone. 224. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 24 April 1681 This morning is come the bad news of the 15 hand canoe being lost off Amessa [at] the oyster shell banke at sea; and I doe not heere of any white men saved, the canoe broken all in peeces and but few blackes saved. I have sent to Amessa and per next shall know further. As to the gitting of anything there is noe hopes, for when our sloope run ashore theire their was moneys spent but the blackes would restore nothing againe. I pray God the white men be alive. 225. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 12 May 1681 Yesterday wee received yours, and according as in ordered, when the 9 hand canoe appeareth [I] shall put what slaves I have for Wyamba for Captain Bowler. 11 I have received the 20 sayes and 100 blew pottkeys out of Captain Branfill, I supose he may be going from hence the beginning of next weeke. 226. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 21 May 1681 This serves cheifely for cover te to inclosed Aprill accounts, which hope will find right and make noate accordingly. As concerning Captain Peeters buisness, it see.mes one of the Companyes pawnes that was in the canoe that was going for Wyamba had layen with one of Aquas souldiers wifes; and had I not gone downe to the water side I believe they had pulled the man in peeces; they panyard Captain Peeter and one of the canoemen, and it cost me 12a before I could redeeme Captain Peeler and the man with him, and I was forced for to pass my word for them , but since I have gott the Capposheers, and they have pulled there houses downe to the ground; Captain Peeter can tell the canoemans name, he must pay the 12a.Inclosedis the ballance of Aprill account being lo 13a lOta. 227. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 12 June 1681 Yesterday I received yours, and as concerning come for Captain Rickard it is readywhen he pleaseth to come for itt. lnclosed also is the May accounts with theballance being 6oz, wihichhope will find right and make note accordingly. lndeedeI have been troubled with the gripping of the gutts for this four in five dayes, soehope your honour will excuse my not sending them sooner. [PS] The weight very bare and the gold bad. 228. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 22 June 1681 Yesterday I received yours, and as to the come Captain Rickard received at An.ishan, if it was bad it was his fault, for hee might have had corne at Anamaboe orAgga, but it is not the time for the best come; and as to Mr Harvey or if anyinterlopers goe ashore at Agga, Ile assure your Honour I cannot hclpe it; but noneshall come ashoare att Anamaboe. Last night came into this road an interloper andCaptain Rickard supposeth it may be Captain Poorteene; and as in ordred forCaptain Rickard 30 chests of come more [he] shall have. 229. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 9 July 1681 This serves chiefly for coverte to the inclosed June accompts and the ballance being 4o 10a Ita, aJI which hope will find right and make note accordingly; and desireyour honour per first good conveyniance for to send some goods: pcrpetuanoes,sayes, sheets, sletias, broad tapsells and niccanees, or what your honour can spare. 230. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 15July 1681 This day I have one of yours of the 12 ditto; and shaJI give your honour creditt forwhat goods sent for this place and Agga: vizt 20 sayes, 60 shott, 30 saker and 30rninion12 for Annamaboe ; for Agga: 50 narrow niccanees, 15 allejaars and 59 gal.lons brandy; and if I can gett any wood shall send in by the 15 hand canoe. I alsoreceived 6 spunge staves, and 100 iron barrs by Captain Rickards boate for Agga. 231. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 12 Aug. 1681 This comes by John Ratliffe as in ordred, and allso July accounts with the ballance being So 13a 9ta, which hope will find right and make note accordingly. Evan Price is very sick of a feavour, but hope in God the worst is past. [PS] Awina Quida the black is gone by land. Pray by the retume of the canoe for to send some coales for the smith which wee want much. 232. Richard Thelwa ll Annamaboe, IO Sept. 1681 Last night I received yours with the citation, which this morning early was nailed on the gate, as inordered. At present I am not well neither have been since left Capo Corsoe Castle, but on Monday at farthest God willing I wilJ come or send Augusts accompts with the ballance. I pray per first good conveniency to send vizt imprimis perpetuanoes blew and greene, sletias fine and course, tapsells broad and narrow, niccanees broad and narrow, sayes, and allejars and powder for they say that the Dankeries 13 and our people and Ahenesa 14 are to fight the Acldms and Anguinas. 15 If soe powder may goe off here. [PS] George King had 6 weekes pay due, thought will not pay all his deibts; but I shall pay as fa.rr as itt will goe. He died the first of this month. 233. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 12 Sept. 1681 This serves chiefly for covert to the inclosed August accompts and the ballance being 4m lo 9a 6ta, which hope will find right and make note according ly. I pray send per first good conveyance vizt imprimis perpettuanoes blew and greene, sletias course and fine, niccanees broad and narrow, tapsells broad and narrow, sayes, and allejars, and powder, for if wars be as they say, powder will goe off. 234. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 14 Sept. 1681 Last night by the 15 hand canoe I received 30 pieces narrow niccanees, 30 broad niccanees in halves, 20 sayes, 25 pieces pcrpettuanocs, 20 barrells of powder and2 chests of sheets. [PS] I suppose sletias, allcjars and coales were forgott, which are much wanted. 235. Richard Thclwall Annamaboe, 17 Sept. 168I Last night by the 15 hand canoe I received 40 sletias whereof 20 are finer thenordinary; and have made noa te of the price. [PS] Pray send some coales by first good conveniencic. 236. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 22 Sept. 1681 These are to acquaint you that all things, the come excepted, are removed fromAgga though with much difficulty, for there were more than 300 people in armesto stop the goods from being carried away: for they are very loath the factory should be broake up, and Mr Thclwall and mysclfe hired souldiers of Annamaboe to bringthe goods per force, and gave them an anchor of brandy soe all is here well; and theAgga people desired a white man there, and arc very much incenced against meeand say that Mr Thelwall and myselfc have sold the place. I have lost some thingsbelonging to myselfe. [ waite your Honours orders and commands in order to my goeing downe, andalsoe that Captain Rickard may take all my things into his ship with a canoe to bringthem ashoarc. I wi 11 pay halfe hyre and she may bring what is att Accra up that your Honour shall order; Soe desire your honours ample com mands. 237. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 26 Sept. 1681 These are on]ey to acquaint your honour that since Captain Sheares 16 and thesouldiers arrivall here hath not been any pallavora with the blacks, but one Sature.day about 4 or 5 hundred people were in arm es for most part of the aftemoone: theysay it was onely to settle a new Mareene. 1 have had noe more news from the Aggapeople, they are at present contented that a white man is there and are in expectationof more goods: they have been informed per James [Cunduitt)17 that after some timethey shall have another factor and goods, soe are at quiet for the present. All herearc in good health. 238. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 27 Sept. 1681 Last night I received yours; and by the John of Barbados came ashoare a se1jant and 5 souldiers. This morning is come into this road Captain Rickard; soe hope shall gett all Mr Hassells things aboard. This day Captain Starland is gone to Anishan to see what Mr Richards and the Curranteer can doe , but I beleeve it is onely an idle pallavora. 18 If I send a white man to Amersa it must be one of those that came from Capo Corsoe last, but shall send a black for to show them the way. When your honour would have the whiteme n for Capo Corsoe must send a canoe, but I have but few here if they all goe, for Jeremy Michell is at Agga, George King dead, John Ratlif at Capo Corsoe, and two lame. Mr Hassell this morning went for Capo Corsoe Castle. 239. Richard Thelwa ll Annamaboe, 30 Sept. 1681 This day I received two of yours; and as in ordered, by the yaule goes the people writt for, and tomorrow morning early shall write Mr Starland the needful!. I have made note concerning what writt about the canoemen. 240 . Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 30 Sept. 1681 This morning came the 5 hand canoe from Amersa, they say they will have 1 angle per butt as formerly in Mr Bellwood and Mr Pysings time , and that the Curranteere hath nothing to doe with their shells. lnclosed is Mr Starlands note alsoe. 19 I pray a word what I shall doe; and whether must pay the canoe men their can key and their turnes goeing off. 241. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 13 Oct. 1681 Last night I received a letter per your order. Indeed I have not been well ever since I was at Caho Corso. By the bearer Francis Nixson I send September accompts and alsoe the ballance being 4m 4o 12a 7ta, which hope will find right and make note accordingly. There is 2 marks of gold, pure Arcanie gold.20 Inclosed is a coppye for what slaves and come Captain Rickard had here. The Arcanies wantes more sheets and of the largest sort of sletias; they will give but 6a for the smallest sorte. If your Honour will send so me good sheets, large sletias, green and blew perpettuanes, broad tapseeles, narrow niccanees, or what your Honour will please to spare. [PS] Two day es since I received a noate from Captain Starland and he sayeth hopeth to gell all his shells in this weeke, but sayeth that one of the canoemen was run awaybut he hath gott another there. There is an Arda missing, one Quonnu, the peoplesaye he is at Fetue. 242. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 21 Oct. 1681 Yesterday I received two of yours, and as to the slaves being at Ashams croorne21 Ihave sent twice, at night and in the day; and if should heare where they were wouldget them secured, but every one thinks if in any of these parts, they are at Abbra,which enlertaines all vaggabones and runnawayes for souldiers. 22 If Mr Richardsper thee Curranteer have any interest with them, if in these parts (they] must be theire. As concerning the fort at Anamaboc I beleeve there be 4 peeces of sayesdew, when the other 2 flankers are built, and as yet their is but one built, and thatwas the reason Agent Bradley put them off; they need not aske for the old Braffoesdebts for be owes the Company 16slaves he gott of Mr Pysing at once beside othersthings, and there was severaU writings drawne in Mr Belwood and Mr Pysings timewhich come to little effect, and when they gett goods in theire hands I am afraid[they] will play the rogue as all of their collour will doe. [PS] To morrow God willing I intend to send the Arders by land, for if should sendthem by sea, they would thinke I send them aboard of ship. 243. Richard The lwall Anamaboe, 22 Oct. 1681 This comes by the Arda slaves which came from Capo Corsoe formerly thought [=though] can be very ill spared; but hope your Honour will send John Rattlife andAwinna Quidda per first conveniency, for have here but few hands both of whitesand blackes. Inclosed is a noat of what slaves sent now, I have paid them all amonthc's pay because they should leave no debts here. This mornin g about breakeof day was brought heare the two slaves your Honour writt to me of, I have put themin irons; and shall take care of them till further order, they asked me a peece of sayefor takeing of them, but I told them I would give them the custome of the country;but they said that was to little, soc I told them I would give them an angle more,that is 9 angles, soe they are gone to consider of it. [PS] Per the slaves have sent three dozen of henns. 244. Richard Thelwa ll Anamaboe, 24 Oct. 1681 This day the Arcanies came and bought 7 barrells of powder, and in the opening of the powder it proves small powder, which they doe not like, they love great cannon powder. They also bought a halfe bendy of iron barrs, but they would have barrs all marked; they say they will be with me to tomorrow or next day, so desire your honour tomorrow to send great powder, iron barrs marked and what goods elce can be sparred. [PS] I beleeve a warr will come on this country soe powder will not doe amiss here. On Satureday last I sent 12 Arder men and one woman, but as yett doe heare noe word of their arrivall. 245. Richard The lwall Anamaboe, 25 Oct. 1681 Yesterday by a boy that came from Mr Nightingale I sent a Jetter for powder and iron barrs; but it must be great powder and marked iron barrs, which letter I hope came safe to hands, soe that the goods may come in Captain Starland and the canoe that comes with Captain Starland may helpe gett them on shoare, and what goods elce your Honour can spare. If ship should goe without must gett your Honour for to send some this day per canoe or tomorrow morning at farthest, for the Arcanies some of them haveing promised for to be with me this day and some tomorrow, and I think its better I should take thei r good money then lett the Dutch have it, soe must desire your Honours excuse for not comeing to Cabo Corsoe. Jnclosed is a noate of what I paid for the oyster shells and the canoemen. I understand the slaves were all arrived but one I suppose he was lame. [PS] I sent a coppy of all the receipt s Captain Rickards gave me but I and Francis Nixson can take our othes the two boxes of letters went of with Captain Rickards. 246. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 27 Oct. 1681 Yesterday morning per Captain Lawrances boate I received 20 barrells of powder, but I opened some and found 3 fine powder. I also per the 15 hand canoe received 200 iron barrs. Captain Coffe and wee had a palavera about the woman but Asham is at Fanteen, soe must stay till his returne home. There was 4 sletias and a little hogg paid on the womens freedome, but them men in irons paid but 2 sletias; and his owne sonn which went from hence in Captain Seaman paid the 2 sletias and the little hogg. Captain Coffe hear'd all. 247. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 29 Oct. 1681 Yesterday by Dominee of Agga I received yours, and as to dashies given att Crist.mas etc. I suppose Mr Carter gave as much as was given att Anamaboe, thoughindeed there is not a quarter of the Cabbisheers, soe must gett them for to take theless: imprimis to the Quantrees and Braffo l saye and 2 perpettuanes and 2 anchorsbrandy; to the Cabbisheers of Anamaboe I saye, 2 perpettuanes and I anchor ofbrandy; to the people for openinge the way l broad niccanee and l bottle of brandy;for the people when they put the small come in the ground 1 case of spiritts; and tothe dancing people sometimes I case of spiritts, I dozen of knives and some one[sic] paper brawle and 2 sheets, they come 4 or 5 times in a yeare. This comes byJames Cunditt , who can informe your Honour how things went att Agga formerly.23 248. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 11 Nov. 1681 This day l received yours and God willing on Munday shall waite on your Honour;and what John Rattlife hath had shall repay Mr Lewin for he had order to lett himhave what he wanted as far as his pay went; I have put [this] in the month's accountsbut Awinna Quidda I have not put downe, this month will be 4 months this day hecame from Anishan verry ill. Just now Griffen is come from Fanteen, and theQuarrant eeres and Braffo; and they would have custo me for every ship that comeshere. They demand 1say and 1 anchor of brandy and say the Dutch at Cormanteenpay soe for every ship that comes to the Mina, and Griffen told them if they had notsold Cormanteen to the Dutch they might had bad theire customes still; but as faras the 2 iron barrs and 2 dozen of knives itt used to be paid formerly. Doctor Griffenfrowes your Honour acckie, and desires an answer tomorrow morning by his boy,which goes with the boye that brought the letter heither [PS] James Cunditte sayeth he write to Mr Swindall. All the great powder is gone,soe if please to send some tomorrow and sayes or allejarrs, and narrow niccaneesor what your honour can spaire. 249. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 21 Nov. 1681 Last night I received yours, and as to Captain Hows being at Amersa as yett [therearej noe shipps theire, but the blacks sayeth there is two shipps at Lague andCrowces;24 one of them supposed to be Mr Shears. If How comet h, shall use my.utmost endeavour to paniare men or boates .2s [PS] I pray send the canoe as soone as possible, here is some Arcanies newly comewith good gold. 250. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 23 Nov. 1681 Yesterday by the 15 hand canoe I received yours with the goods vizt: 20 sayes, 20 chercolees, 20 herba longees, 20 silke longees, 40 broad blew baftas, 10 striped silks, 20 peeces blew long cloathes in halves, 20 barrells powder, and 20 printed perpettuanes. [PS] The canoe goes to Anishan this evening for wood. 251. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, JODec. 1681 Just now I have received yours and have made note of whatt writt concerning Moree people. On Sunday last the Anguinas and supposed Cabesa Tera26 people fell on the Accrongs; these peop le say the Accrongs have gott the best, but as yett not knowne because the Accrongs and these [Annamaboe] people are all one country people ,27 though several] heads doe appeare, and some slaves. Captain Woodfine presents his service to your honour and intends for Capo Corsoe in 2 or 3 daye s; but will see whether slaves wiJI present or noe ; in few dayes God willing shall send November accounts and the ballance. 252. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 15 Dec. I 68 I This serves chiefely for a covert to the inclosed November accompt with the bal.lance being 8m 13a 8ta, which with the 3m lo 8a I paid Mr HenrySpurvay on the 15 ditto as per accompt , all which hope will find right and make noate accordingly; itt goes by Francis Nixon. As to Agga factory itt must all be pulled downe , and new built or eke it will fall the next raines, thought [= though] the windows and doors and some of the thatch may serve againe . I beleive itt may cost 3 or 4 ounces. I gave James Cunduitt a forme how Wyamba house was built, which is in a better forme than ever Agga was built; and itt will be all one charge. [PS] There is 7 marks of very good Arcanie gold. 253. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 28 Dec. 1681 La st nigh t I received yours, and have made noat of whatt writt about come, which shall be effected as soon as possible. I shall want about 30 or 40 deale boards , for to keepe the come dry alt the bottom. The chercolees [I] shall deliver to CaptainThomas Woodfine as inordered . 254. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 4 Jan. 1681/2 Yesterday I received yours, and as to the unkind usage to Mr Shears, they took himfor to be Mr Starland , hee fireing att the canoes had like for to doe these peoplesome harm, soe they sweare if cou ld gett him or his people would beate them soundJy; I told them that the Braffo and Quantrees [var. Quarranteers ] if they didsoe would forfeit 400 bendies; but they say they must gett cracras to buy their wives cloaths and to eate. Indeed I told them they were all Braffoes; 28 they are the wors trogues on all the coast of Guynie, and I must have patience, perforce. As to gettingof come they wont take under I angle and half for they say the interlopers give soe.Captain Thomas Woodfine had the 10 ehercolees and 50 chests of come as inordere d him; hee sett saile from hence on Sunday noone last past. [PS] I shall see and gett some good fowls and send per first oppertunity. 255. Rkhard Thelwa ll Annamaboe, 12 Jan. 1681/2 Last night I received yours; and as to come these people will not sell any under 1angle and 6 taccoes; Docter Griffin can informe your honour. Indeed I am afraid ittwill be very deare, they say itt is 6 angles a chest at Axim; and if ships come itt will raise the price here, soe cannot gett any att the prices mentioned. May please tosend per first good conveyance, tapsells, sheets, perpettuanoes blew and green,narrow niccanees , sayes, sletias, and what elce your honour ca n spare. I have sentfor Yabboyes about the canoe, so if comes before sea ling shall write what he saith. [PS] Per the canoe have sent 2 dozen of hens, all could gett all present. 256. Rich ard Th elwall Anamaboe, 13 Jan. 168 1/2 Last night I spoke with Yabboys about the canoe, and bee saith there is 11 !handcanoe att Laggue and they will have for it, 6 sayes; soe if Captai n Woodfine likesthe canoe and the price [he) may have itt. As concerning the come they will not lettitt goe under I angle and halfe. When Captain Hill was here last I paid 3 ang les achest, and buy itt by the taccoe call ibash.1 am promi sed by some of the Cabisheers about a 100 chests tomorrow , soe doe not doubt but in few daye s to gett what yo urhonou r hath orderd mee. Docter Griffin is att Fanteen; when he returncth shall send Decembers accompt and the ballanc e. Jhope your honour will not altogether forgett Anamaboe but lett mee have a few goods as tapse lls, sheets, blew and greene perpettuanoes, sletias, paper brawles, sayes and what other goods can spare. 257. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 16 Jan. 1681/2 Last night Docter Griffin came from Fan teen. The reason of his long stay there was because these Capusheers not goeing to Fanteen, soe if they doe not goe before this and Wensday, all the Quantrees and Abbraers will be on these people for their abuses to the English and their tradeing with interlopers. 29 Docter Griffin desires an answer by this canoe this night. [PS] Docter Griffin intends to stay here till Wensday till all the pallavora is over unless your honour sends for him before. 258. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 20 Jan . 1681/2 Last night by the 15 hand canoe I received 30 broad tapsells, 25 perpettuanoes, 20 sayes, 20 course sletias, 4 chests of sheets, 50 paper brawles, and 50 Guinie stuffs, for which have given creditt. By Docter Griffin I send December accompts and the ballance being 8 ounces of good Arcanie gold, all which hope will find right and make noate accordingly. Yesterday the Quantres and Docter Griffin made an end of the pallavora and they have prendeed these people, and promised that noe such thing shall be done any more; they have put Captain Quashee with Captain Dick to looke after the white men here, soe desire your honour will be pleased to adde something more to their months sallary. Docter Grnffin will acquaint your honour of all. Indeed hee hath been att a great deale of troub le and charge to doe what hath been done. PS. Per the returne of the canoe may please to send some coales. 259. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe , I Feb. 1681/2 Last night I received yours , and as to come Captain Hill hath aboard 270 chests, he wantes but 2 boates loads.30 As for slaves your Honour knows they sell goods cheaper and give more for slaves then the Company price is, soe cannot buy any if any ships here. Last night came into Anishan roade 2 French ships31 for come, so am afraid will raise the price of come, being very scarce. I must begg your Honours pardon for not inlarging at present, being very lame, having three wormes in one legg, being in a great paine, soe that am hardly able to write. 260. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 16 Feb. 1681/2 Last night by the 15 hand canoe I received 150 iron barrs, 200 blew long cloathesin halves, and 50 Guinea stuffs, for which I shall give credill. The 100 broad blew baftas went to Anishan by James Cunduitt. I now send Januaryes account with balance being 3m lo 8a, which hope will find right and make noat accordingly. Thegold is good Arcanie gold. I hope your Honour will spare me some blew and greenperpettuanoes, sheets, course sletias, tapseels, niccanees broad and narrow, allejars,paper brawles. 261. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 2 March 1681/2 Last night I received yours with an order for 30 or 40 chests of come. Indeed I have not halfe so much, nor none can gett, for the interlopers lye in Agga and Corman.teen road and buy up all the come, nay they give 2 angles and 2 angles 6 taccoes achest in good gold; soe that I cannot gett any without a larger price. I think CaptainStarland must pick out some of the best of the come at Agga factory.The Arcanies come to mee every day and say if your honour will not send meesome blew and green perpetuaaos, sheets, course sletias, tapsells, niccannees etc.that they will goe aboard the interlopers, and buy goods there . 262. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, IO March 1681/2 Last night I received yours with a mould for to cutt some timber, but doe notmention how many peeces. ltt will bee difficult to gett, aad if should find any if ittbe their fetish trees they will not suffer any body to cutt them. JohnRattlife shallsee if any possible to begoll. As to slaves it is impossible I should gett any as longas any ships in these parts; for they give more than I can and sell goods for less then I can; neither have I the goods they would have. Per Captain Hill God willing Iintend to send my Febru ary accompts. Yesterday Captain Hill's boate was going for water to Cabo Corsoe and the Morea people hath most barbarous ly abusedthem, foure very bad and they think will dye; they tooke away their maine saile, Iblunderbuss, 2 cuttlaces, and 2 musketts. 32 Captain Hill will be at Cabo Corsoe in2 or 3 dayes. 263. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 13 March 1681/2 This serves cheifly for covert to the inclosed February months accom pts, which goes with Captain Hill, and alsoe the baUance being I ounce 3 angles, au which hope will find right and make note accordingly. As to the timber according to the mould, I have sent John Ratttlife and one white man more and two Blacks, they have been 2 dayes out and could find but one, and that the Blacks would not Jett them cutt, for they say it is their fetish; if any of that sort be gott it must be where few or none inhabbitts , or by the rivers or brooks. I suppose if to be gott any where on this coast, is att Wyamba. 264. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 14 March 1681/2 Just now I received yours with an order to panyar all Dutch canoes etc.33 This morning Captain Hill sett saile for Cabo Corsoe, bee panyard a Mine canoe one Udrae, bound for Allampo, hee bas 13 men and I women and some goods, but panyard them on the Morea mens heads for the abuse done to his men. 34 I desire may heare from your honour as soon as possible, for Captain Hill said when he was here, that hee would not medle with any white men but blacks; soe desire to know whether should panyar white men or noe. May please to send mee some iron barrs and blew and greene perpettuanoes, when Captain HiU comes for Annamaboe. [PS] May please to send a good quantity of iron barrs, but they must be all marked , otherwise they will not take them if they be never soe bigg. 265. Richard Tbelwall Anamaboe, rnMarch 1681/2 Yours I have received dated the 15th instant and have made noate accordingly to take Dutchmen and blacks that belong to them, and to use them more civilly then Captain Hills men were. As to the timber to be gott here, I feare it is impossible, it grows by the rivers and brookes, and must be gott where few or non inhabbitters are, for tis their fetish; and [they] will not lett any one cut them; if to be gott any where on this coast I suppose att Wyamba. May please if not sent already [send] a good quantity of iron barrs , and some blew and green perpettuanoes, the barrs must be marked. 266. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 30 March I 682 Last night I received yours, and have made noate to seize both Whites and Blacks all possible I can. I received of Mr Shears 600 iron barrs, 20 red and 20 blew andgreen perpettuano es, and have given creditt for them. 267. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 7 Apr. 1682 Yesterday I received yours with an order for to purchase 30 or 40 good slaves withthe goods I have in the factory, but doe not mention the prices, the men here are 7pezos 2 angles and the women 6 pezos 2 angles in good gold, Captain Hill caninforme your honour, and they will not give but 9 or IOangles att the most for redperpettuanos, soe if your honour will order mee for to give money or goods asothers give, it is probable I may gett some, otherwise they carry their slaves aboardships. I have made noate to purchase 5 or 600 chests of come, and shall gett it ascheap as possible I can, but not to exceed 2 angles per chest, but fear itt will be verydifficult to gett soe much, itt being very scarce att present. 268. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe , 8 Apr. 1682 Last night I received yours and have made noate of what writt about purchaseingslaves and getting come, I shall gett as cheape as is[?J possible. The Cabessa Terrapeople last weeke, would not Jett the Arcanies come downe,35 but on Monday Godwilling, if any slaves come, shall gen them as cheape as any one, they want tapsellsand sheets, but tapsells most. [PS] May please to send mee some paper and inke, per first oppertunity, which Jmuch want. 269. Richard Thelwall Anama boe, 13 Apr. 1682 Yesterday I received yours by the 15 hand canoe with 3 chests of sheetes, 50 broadtapsells, I4 fine sletias and 30 course sletias, for which have given creditt for thesame, and have made noate that they are for the purchasing of slaves for CaptainHills quick dispatch. I assure your honour I shall use my utmost endeavour to gettwhat slaves possible I can. lnclosed I send Marchs monthly account by JamesCunduitt with the ballance being 3 ounces, 1 angle, which hope will find right andmake noate accordingly. As I wrote in my former the Cabessa Terra, Quomong,3637 'Angan and these people have stoped the way, soe that noe slaves nor any trade attpresent. 270. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe , 20 Apr. 1682 Just now Treceived yours whereby I understand [you] admire [you] have not heard from mee. In my two former I advised your honour the ways are stopped soe that there are few slaves and little trade. I have in irons but 6 men slaves and I beleeve shall gett but 5 of them, but I am promised if any slaves come I shall have them. As to come it is very scarce, I have but 26 in 28 chests. I will assure your honour I wiJJ doe what possible I can for to gett slaves and come, being boa.the scarce att present. 271. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 4 May 1682 Last night I received yours whereby [you] doe wonder have not heard from mee. Indeede I have not had an oppertunity till now, only by Mr Pley whoe departed the same night Captain Hil1 sett saile; and I desired him to infofTl)e your honour what was past , soe hope will please to pardon my neglect in not writting. I put aboard Captain Hill 16 slaves , 8 men and 8 woemen, and 44 chests of come, all I could gett. And since I cannot hardly gett come to eate, these people as yett have not done sowing their small come, soe that att present I cannot gett any great corne, 38 and now they aske more for their come, Captain Attwell can infom1e your honour. 39 As to the Company's concerns att Anamaboe I thank God all is very well and God willing I doe not doubt but for to give a good accompt thereof. As co ncerning the Arcanies tradeing with interlopers, att this place they doe not, but what they doe att other places I cannot tell, yett they carry slaves aboard the Company ships and they sell them goods as cheape as any interloper, indeed I think they [i.e. Company ships) are the greatest, and spoyle the factory's. I have made inquiry after Aboun.shee, hee liveth att Anishan but if I can get him here I shall secure him till further order. 272. Richard The lwall Annamaboe , 23 May 1682 Yours of the 20th instant I have received, and had sent James Cunduitt up sooner , but the weather was very bad, and now hee goes in Captain Shepheards boate with him; and have sent John Rattliffe for to looke after Agga factory. Per James Cun.duitt I alsoe sent Aprills months accompt with the ballance, being 2 marks, 1 ounce and IO tacco's, which hope will find right and make noate accordingly; I had sent them sooner but could not gett any safe Conveyance before now. As concerning come , this day I putt aboard Captain Shepheard 50 chests of come, att 2 angles per chest, and since his ship is come hither it is risen to 2 angles and 6 tacco's per chest. Indeed come is very scarce att present and if any more ships come hither I am afraid ill will raise come to 3a or 4a per chest. Captain Shepheard God willing this eveningintends for Cabo Corsoe, I suppose hee may have gott of the Blacks 15in 20 chestsof come . I am promised some more come. I assure your honour I doe what lieth inmy power, and would send oftener but am loath to put the Company to 2 anglescharge for every letter. [PS) May please to send per first good conveyance some broad tapsells, lead barrs,sheets, Guyney clouts, large sletias and blew and green perpetuano's. I alsoe wantsome match, carteridge paper and minjon shott. 273. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe , 27 May 1682Last night I received yours whereby [you) desire to know how Captain Shepheardproceeds in getting of come, I suppose hee may have about I 00 chests aboard.Yesterday writt your honour by James Cunduitt, which hope is arrived safe. I havelarge promises of come, though little performance, ill being very scarce. [PS] Just now I received 30 miruon shott, one quire of carteridge paper and onescane of match. Indeed if the ships had stayed att Capo Corsoe I beliceve that comemight have been att a cheaper rate then it is now. 274. [receipts] Richard Shepheard Anamaboe, 28 May 1682I doe acknowledge to have received from Mr Thelwall one 11 hand canoe, forwhich he paid I mark and 4 ounces of gold, itt being on account of the RoyallAffrican Company at Arda.40 Richard Shepheard Anamaboe , 29 May 1682I doe acknowledge to have received 100 chests of come from Mr Richard Thelwallon accompl of the Royall Affrican Company of England for the use of their slaveson board the St George. 275. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 3 June I682I have received two of yours, one by MrShears and one by Captain Shepheard, andhee bath seen thee come alt Agga but doth not like itt, and [I] have alsoe bought a11 band canoe, a verry good strong canoe, but must give 6 bendy's. I hope in a fewdayes to gett the IOslaves for MrShears, but cannot getl them under 7 peze 2 anglesand 6 peze 2 angles. May please to send per Mr Shears or per first conveyniency some blew and green perpetuanoes, broad tapsells, lead barrs, sheets, Guyney clouts, large sletias. 276. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 20 June 1682 This morning came one of the Quantrees from Cabo Corsoe but never a letter, and they want something towards their danceing which begins to morrow or next day, and they wont lett mee alone till had writt your honour about in. Indeed I want a copie of the agreement, or else a line or two what I must give them, they send a man on purpose. 277. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 23 June 1682 Last night I received yours whereby would know how come sells here. Itt is att 2 angles 6 tacco 's per chest in good gold, besides what dashey's in brandy and cloaths. Last night most of the Cabisheers went for Fanteen, this day being their Christmas day, as they call it, soe till they retume will be little come gotl, and will stay there 9 in 10daye s, and new come will not be good here this 6 weeks; the come att Cabo Corsoe wiIIbe ripe a month or three weekes before this; but if your honour will order mee to buy old come and give gold and dashies, as others did and doe , I suppose may gett some as well as others, but what quantity I cannot tell, till our people retume. lnclosed is the two May accompts. 278. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 24 June 1682 Yesterday I received yours, with an order for the bricklaye r to be sent on board Mr Shears for Accra, which shall be effected and in the evening Mr Shears will sett saile, and with this letter goes Huckamee one of the brickmakers, the other I sent yesterday to Cabo Corsoe, with May accompts. When [he] returnes shall be sent also. 279. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 27 June 1682 This comes by Francis Nixon by whome I have sent 6 marks of good Arcanie gold on acccompt of June monthly accompt, and desire your honour will be pleased for to send mee some more iron barrs; but they must be all marked , for indeed I have a great many barrs here, but they are very small and most of them not marked; and [send] some perpettuano's, for I have 12 perpetuanoes that came downe last, a little broken, and they wont take them without some abatements. I want some powde r but itt must be all greate else they wont buy itt, all the powder I have is small and they wont buy itt. May please to send me some brandy, for itt draws neare the bottom, and some paper for itt almost gon. [PS] I have bought Captain Starlands canoe man as in ordered but could not getthim under a bendy,41 soe when your honour pleases to order mee I shall send himfor Cabo Corsoe Castle. 280. Richard Thelwa ll Anamaboe , 29 June 1682 Yesterday by the 15 hand canoe I received 150 iron barrs, 2 bailes of perpetuano's,and 20 barrelJs of powder, and very speedily would send one hogshead of brandy.I have per Captain Peeler sent the canoeman that was panyard alt Wyamba but wasforced to give a bendy and much adoe to getl him. 281. Richard Thelw all Anamaboe, 4 July 1682 Last night I received yours, whereby [you] desire for lo gett 450 or 500 chests ofcome for Captain North. This morning I spake with our Cabisheers, and hee thathath most hath but 5 chests; but they say if I would give as others did, they wouldsend to Annian42 and gett some; I told them all the ships were goo, and the otherships would take new come, but att last when they went away, they said if yourhonour will give 2 angles they will send up into the country for to gett some, soc ifplease to send present advice, what [you] will give, I shall use my utmost endeav.our, but fyou] must send word before the ship comes downc, otherwise they willraise the price. Yesterday and this day I sold 43 perpetuano 's and most of the ironthat came downe in the canoes, I have 6 in 7 marks of good gold which shall sendper ftrst good oppertunity. May please to send some more perpetuano's per firstgood oppertunity, for great many oftbcse are broken and wormeaten. The Arcanieslike these last iron barrs, and would have mee write for some more of the same, and some good perpetuano's. 283. Richard Thelw all Annamaboe , 6 July 1682 Yesterday I received yours, and as in ordered have made bargaine with theCabisheers for 500 chests of corne att 2 angles per chest, and their canoes to carryitt aboard, but itt is their custome they will have something, they will not make adry bargaine; they tell me I shall have ill all in a few dayes. This morning they havebrought in 20 in 30 chests, and have sent their people into the country for to gettthe rest. 1 have made noate of the brandy, iron and perpetuanoes that comes byCaptain North, for which 1returne your honour many thanks. In 2 or 3 dayes shallsend June account with the ballance. 283. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 7 July 1682 This serves cheifly for covert to the inclosed June accompt which goes with Francis Nixon, and the ballance being 7 marks, 4 ounces , 3 angles, and 6 tacco's, which with the 6 marks formerly sent, makes the full ballance in all 13 marks, 4 ounces, 3 angles, and 6 taccoes, which hope will find right and make noate accordingly. 284. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 16 July 1682 Yesterday I received yours. And as to the come I shall putt aboard 76 chests of old come, all that I have att present, though they promise every day more, butt itt comes but slowly; and new come they will have I angle and 6 taccoes per chest, and I am afraid that there is not old come enough in the country for this ship. Captain North is very weake.43 [PS] I spake to Yaboyes about the cow and bee wont take under a bendy and 12 angles, which I think is very deare. 285. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 19 July 1682 Yesterday I received yours, and as to old come , as I wrote in my former it comes in but slowly, I have but 15 chests, since the other putt aboard, I have spoke to the Cabisheers and this day suppose may have about l 00 chests of new come , but they wont take under 1 angle 6 taccoes per chest and itt will be 6 in 7 dayes adrying before itt will be fitting to put aboard ship, I put itt on the top of the house and on the flankers adrying every day. I assure your honour I doe what possible I can for Captain Norths speedie dispatch, bee is very weake but the Docter saith hee is on the mending hand. 286. Richard Thelwall no date [July 1682] This serves chiefely for covert to the inclosed accompt with the ballance being 2 markes, 3 ounces, 3 angles and 4 tacco's, which goes by Mr John Smith, which hope will find right and make noate accordingly. I received of Captain Sheppard 8 sayes whereof 3 broken, 5 perpetuano 's and 3 broken and 2 of them redds, 9 fine sletias and 30 Guyney clouts, for which shall give creditt for in June account with the other goods received from Cabo Corsoe Castle . 287. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe , 6 Aug. 1682 Yesterday I received yours whereby understand on Monday the 15 hand canoe will come hither with goods, for which I give your honour many thanks. As concerni ngbuying 1,000 chests of come, itt may be gott in a shorte time, but the people herewont take under l angle and a halfe. I told them your honour paid but I angle, butthey told mee that all Fetue had not come enough for 2 shipps and then must beforced for to give a larger price, these people are cunning rogues; soe if please toin order to gett itt at 1 angle and halfe itt may be done. [PS) Yesterday the Abbraers and Quomong people fell on Connanteen peop le andkiJled 6, and panyard 33, burnt halfe the great towne, some came hither but theyare all run away. 288. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 9 Aug. 1682 Yesterday I received yours by the 15 hand canoe, as alsoe 2 bailes of sayes, 10piecess white longcloath and 99 pieces of blew longcloaths, there wanting 2 halfepieces, they were told 3 times. And haveing this good oppertunity of the 15 handcanoe I have by Benjamin Cantrill sent 4 marks of good Arcanie gold on Julymonths accompt, and as to the come shall gett as soone as possible; as concerningslaves, though the Abbraers panyard the Cormanteen people, yen they dare not sellthem for they are all of one country,44 and itt is thought that that man [whoJ was theoccasion of Connanteen being burnt, will be ruined and all his generation. IndeedI beleeve slaves will be very deare, and these people will not sell now under 7 pease2 angles for a man and 6 peasc 2 angles for a woeman; and if please to in order togive as others give I may gett some. [PS) John Wise desires that Tom True may come downe to him, Awina Quiddabeing lame and ill. 289. Richard Wallis Annamaboe, 19 Aug. 1682 This goes by the canoe that brought mee hjther and serves chiefe ly to give yourhonour advice that I haveing made an end Thirsday night in Mr Thc lwalls businessmy stay hath been here ever since for Mr Richards, whoe the same day I came hither(I] heard was abroad, soe immediatly wrote William Beard to dispatch some oneto him for his quick retume, he wrote mee back hee had done itt and that in allprobabillity hee might be att home on Fryday. This morning a small noate came toMr Thelwall from Mr Richards that hee was getting of canoes and shou ld not beatt home in 3 dayes time, I shall waite for his comeing if your honour order meenot to the contrary, and intend back in a hamrnack, for yesterday morning I wasvoiloently attacqu 'd with an ague and feavour and vomitting, which I judge pro.ceeded from cold that I had taken in the canoe. Captain Ware is come ashoare but brings noe order what quantity of come hee is to take in, which Mr Thelwall desires your honour would be pleased to send. Hee hath 700 chests or thereabouts and more dayly is brought in.45 290. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 23 Aug. 1682 Yesterday Captain Ware had aboard ship 310 chests and this day hope will gett most of his come. I have made noate for the 50 chests as inordcred. Captain Ware God willing on Fryday intends for Capo Corsoe. Mr Wallis is very ill and the Docter saith past all recovery, hee had an ague and a feavour the first day hee came ashoare here, hee saith hee gott cold in the canoe. 291. Richard Thelwa11 Anamaboe, 23 Aug. 1682 This morning I wrote your honour that Mr Wallis was very ill, in 3 or 4 hours after hee departed this life and desired mee to send his body to Cabo Corsoe for lo be buryed, soe for to fulfill the desire of the dead I have sent itt, hee desireth that Mr Stapleton should looke after his concerns as by the papers in his small trunk which comes by his boy, as alsoe desires Mr Stapleton for to see him decently buryed. 292. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 30 Aug. 1682 Yours of the 28th ditto I received and immediatly as inordered sent the inclosed to Mr Richards but hee would not write, saying to the man that hee had neither pen, inke nor paper, itt was all att Anishan; and as to gett the goods I beleeve itt is the best way for to lett them alone a little while till the Cun-anteer comes, for his son Quacoone told mee nothing should be medled withaJI, and Benjamin Cantrill hath the keys. Yesterday Captain Nurse sett saile, I put aboard him 200 chests of come and hee saith must have more. This day Captain Ware will saile, hee hath gott a canoe. Captain Nurse his letter an-ived him att Lague, hee presents his service to your honour. Inclosed is July accompt, which hope will find right and make noate accordingly. May please to send per first good oppertunity some Guyney clou ts and some paper braUs. 293. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 13 Sept. 1682 This day I received the goods put aboard Captain Starland vizt 6 boysado 's, 30 peeces of blew longcloat hs in halves, 100 Guyney clouts, 100 paper brawls and 50 narrow niccanees, and for what wood and come Captain Starland shall want I shall furnish him with. Captain Ambrose tomo rrow about noone I suppose will have allhis come aboard. 46 I shall take care for to send a white man to Amersa about theoystershells but am afraid there will not be anything abated. As soone as these shipsare gon I shall gett the timber downe to the waterside, and shall send the slave perfirst oppertunity. The other slave that Bonishee hath, hee saith hee paid a bendy;but as I understand him, is desirous for to change for a slave Mr Shears hath. I shallmake further enquiry after and shall acquaint your honour. 294. Richard Thelwall Annam aboe, 14 Sept. 1682 Just now I received yours and if your honour think fitting I beleeve itt would bebetter taken that William Pley and William Beard goe by your order, but if any thingthat they should want any of my assistance, I can be there in one houre; besidesthese people are great rogues and will say that I am the occasion of that factory 'sbeing remov'd, and may breed a differance between these peopl e and mee, soe ifpossib le Tdesire your honour I may be excused; else these people will lay all thefault on mee and I shall never live in quiett. 295. [rece iptJ Anna maboe, 16 Sept. 1682 Then received from Mr Richard Thelwall 316 chests of come whereof 6 was lostin the sea comeing off, for use of the Royall Affrican Company of England on boardthe Goulden Fortune, I say receive d pcrLott Ambrose 296. Richard Tbelwall Annamaboe, 18 Sept. 1682 Just now I received yours as Captain Ambrose was goeing off, and I tou ld him whatyour honour wrote; and hee protesteth that hee desired Mr Richards for to comeinto the fort and resigne up himselfe unto mee,47 but Mr Richards answered what, will you betray mee, that was all hee said, in the time they were discourseing I wentand gave our people powder and bulletts for fcare of any trouble, soe Mr Richardswent to one of our Cabosheers houses in towne, but l tould him they must notprotect him, soe I beleeve his boyes telling him bee thought for to make an escapeand run away, soe our Bendyfoo 's48 quickly fought him back againe, they say heefired att them 6 times, that was the reason they tookc away all his cloaths, but hisgun would not goe off. They will have 8 gallons of brandy and some powder fortakeing of him. I think your honour would doe well for to send Docter Meade downe this night, itt being his sick night,49 and the other Docter is goo and hee being verry weake, soe for feare of a relapse and noe body for to helpe him itt is better that hee comes as soon as possible. 297. Ambrose Meade [Annamaboe], 18 Sept. 1682 Yesterday a little after sunsett I arrived at Anamaboe where I found Mr Starland in his paroxisme and very delireous , whereupon I immediatly cupped him and tooke a considerable quant ity of blood from his temples , whereupon hee quickly fell asleep and rested all the whole night, this is the third fitt which hee hath had. This morning have given him a doce of physick because hee hath not been purged since hee hath been taken ill , for the chi rurgeon of Captain Ambrose only Jett him blood and gave him one or two glysters His fitt comes every other day towards evening. I doe intend to draw blisters but if I can possibly be spared from Cabo Corsoe itt will be more proper to apply one 8 or 10 hours before his fitt comes, which I hope in god may prevent itt. If your worship cannot spare mee soe long I will apply them this night and come up according to your first order, although they will not be soe proper. 298. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 22 Sept. 1682 This comes with the corpe s of Mr Starland, whoe departed this life, this day a quarter of an houre past 11; hee had in go ld about him 1 ounce , 3 angles, three gold rings, three silver buttons for his shirt, one gowne and one coate, which God willing shall send tomorrow by John, Docter Meads mate, whoe can infom1e your honour how hee was after Docter Mead left him. [PS] Here is a pockett book which shall goe by John, but his key's and everything are left with his mate aboard ship, as the Docters mate can informe your Honour. 299. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 28 Sept. 1682 This serves cheifly for covert to the inclosed August accompt with the ballance being 2 ounces, 10 angles , and 8 taccoe s, which with the 2 markes of gold I gave Mr Spurvay when I was last att Cabo Corsoe Castle makes even that accompt , which hope will find right and make noate accordingly. This comes by Francis Nixon, by whome I have sent 10 marke s of good Arcanie gold on September months accompt, soe there is in all 10 markes, 2 ounces, IOangles and 8 taccoes. May please to send per first good oppertunity some good perpettuano 's, white long cloaths, sayes, pewter basons great and small, Guyney clouts and some great pow.der. I expect the Arcanies downe here on Monday next, I have sold them some ofthe perpelluanoes that were broken and wormeaten au l0a , the good att I la onewith another, but if your honour would order the red perpettuano's for to be soldatt 9a and I 0a they would goe off, better then to Jett the wormes and cockroacheseate them. [PS] Since Mr Starlands death Oystershell Quashee is dayly with mee about theslave to desire [he] may have an order to pay him. 300 . Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 30 Sept. 1682 Yesterday by the 15 hand canoe I received 5 bailes of perpettuano's, 3 bailes of say's, 200 Guyney clouts, and 25 pieces of white long cloaths, which have givencreditt for accordingly; by the same canoe I have sent one Arda slave and 24 sticksof wood which John Wise cull att Anishan, the rest shall get downe as soon aspossible, for itt is a greate way off this place. 301. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 4 Oct. 1682 Last night 1received yours. and concerning the Captain of the Arcanies l have spoketo him and told him if [he] gave your honour encouragement you would considerhim something, hcc saith hee would looke out for to gett some, Indeed hee hath brought mee already above 3 marks. I be]eive the Dutch have but little goods, thatis one reason, but the Captain saith Anishan Arcanies have above 2 pease a month,soe hee saith hee may deserve itt as well as others. Here is one slave in townc ofthe Ardas but they would change for one Fanteen man that is aboard Captain Nurse.Last night I paid Oystershell Quashee for 109 bulls. The canoemen made 38 [var.39) turns aboard ship. Quashee is still att mee about the slave. 302 . Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 12 Oct. 1682 This serves cheifly for covert to the inclosed September accompt with the ballancebeing 1marke, l ounce, I angle and 10 tacco 's, which with the 10 markes I sent up the 18th September past makes even that accompt, which hope will find right andmake noate accordingly. This comes by Francis Nixon by whome I have sent 10markes of good Arcanie gold on October months accompt, soe there is in all 11marks, l ounce, I angle and 10 taccoes.May please to send per first good oppertunity some perpetuano's and good ironbarrs, but they must be all marked else they wont take them. As concerning the redslave50 I bought him of an Arcanie but as yett hee is not come out of the country, but Boneshee saith hee bought his slave of a Fanteen man, but wiU not tell his name without a greate dashey and if [he] should give itt I question whether [it?] should be ever the better, nay hee saith there hath been 5 slaves sold aboard interlopers. Indeed these people are the greatest rogues in all these country's. As to the custome of the country, if they had been taken in Fettue country then but a pease, but if in another Kings country they sell them; soe they say is the custome. 51 I cannot heare of any slaves at Quobinas croome. 303. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 16 Oct. 1682 Last night I received yours. When Captain Nurse was here hec saith hee writt to your Honour by his boate which was gon for Caho Corsoe; on Monday God willing hee begins to take in his come, soe about the latter end of the weeke hee will be ready to saile. 304. [recei pts] Annamaboe, 15 Sept. 1682 Received then of Richard Thellwall 35 chests of corne on board the Cape Coast Briganteen for the use of the Royall Affrican Company of England, I say received Hugh Shearsper mee Annamaboe, 17 Sept. 1682 Received of Mr Thelwall 3 chests of Corne and 200 of wood, I say received per mee William Triming Annamaboe, 19 Oct. 1682 Received of Mr Richard Thelwall 500 chests of come, there being an order from the Agent and Councill for 400, the other 100 I shall desire the Agent to give an order for; likewise 2 men and 4 woemen received for accompt of the Royall Henry NurseAffrican Company, I say received per mee 305. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe [var. Anishan], 22 Oct. 1682 Yesterday l received yours and by the 15 hand canoe I received 200 iron barrs, and 2 bailes of perpetuanoes and I sent all the poles were left, being 21. As to the gold I sent your Honour all I had by Francis Nixon, and the Arcanies doe not come every weeke, some they stay as they call itt for their boone day, I have spoke to them andif any comes I shall send itt as soone as possible. 306. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 24 Oct. 1682 Last night I received yours and irnmediatly as inordered I sent a Whiteman toAmersa for to take care and see they make good measure. 307. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 8 Nov. 1682 Yesterday I received yours, and as inordered I have by Evan Price sent all the goldI have being 9 markes of good Arcanie gold. May please to send per first goodoppertunity a good quantity of perpettuano's and iron barrs, but the barrs must bemarked, and some sayes. 308. Richard Thclwall Annamaboe, 15 Nov. 1682 Yesterday by the 9 hand canoe I received yours with 170 iron barrs, and before bythe small canoe 30, which makes in all 200, and 4 bailes of perpetuano's and I baileof sayes, which have given credilt for according ly, and as inordered I have sentCharles Roberts up, soe hope when the powder is don your Honour will sendCharles Roberts downe againe, for I have but few people here and most of themlame. Inclosed is October accompt, which hope will find right and make noateaccordingly, the ballance I sent up by Evan Price and 2 marks, 4 ounces, and l angleon November accompt as per accompt appears. On the 12 October I sent 11m Iola !Ota, whereof IOm was on October accompt, and by Evan 9m, whereof 6m 3oISa is on October accompt and 2m 4o Ia on November accompt. This day ourtowne Arcanies come and to morrow the Arcanies from Cormanteen, soe I beleeve in a few day's these goods will be gon, and as yett the pallavora is not ended soehope your Honour will excuse my goeing up to Cabo Corsoe. Indeed I cannot telJbut these people may play the rogue in my absence, for I know these people aregreat rogues. 309. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 16 Nov. 1682 Just now I received yours, and as to the slave that was profered mee that was oneof the Companys, it was rogue Bonishee's, but hee would not selJ him under abendy, which I did acquaint your Honour, but your answer was itt was unreason.able, and itt was mentioned when Griffin was att Fanteen. I know of noe other,neither was any other proffered mee, if should I would have given the price of aman slave. As to come, if Captain Churchey comes in 3 or 4 day's itt is ready. Andas to a 9 hand canoe, here is one here, but they aske 5 bendy's. 310. Richard Tbelwall Annamaboe, 22 Nov. 1682 This comes by Francis Nixon by whome I have sent IOmarks of good Arcanie gold on November accompt. May please to send per first good oppertunity some per.petuano's, sheets, and sletias, and if Captain Churchey be not gon before this arrives may send some iron. 311. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, l Dec. 1682 I owe answer to two for want of conveniency of sending. By James Bayly in the Busse I received 200 iron barrs, 4 cases of say's and 8 bailes of perpetuano's; per the Heron, Captain George Cburchey 2 cases of say's, 2 bales of perpetuano's, 2 cases of course sletias, and l of fine sletias, l0 chests of sheets and 200 iron barrs, for which have given credit! for accordingly and doe not doubt but in a small time for to give a a good accompt thereof, as the Arcanies come downe. Att present sayes is a drug, for the Dutch have lowered their say's to 17 angles and the people say theirs is of a better couller (Patience). Two or three day's agoe the Dutch Copeman of Cormanteen was shott with a peece of iron in his left eye and one through his halt by one of Annamaboe. 52 All these Cabasheers are att Fanteen as yett, soe I know notanythingof their pallavora. TomorrowI supposeCaptainChurcheywill have all his come aboard. 312. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 7 Dec. 1682 Yesterday I received yours, and as to the Company's affaires I thank God all is well, though all present a small trade by reason the Dutch bad lowered the prizes of goods. I have made note of what your Honour writt concerning the lowering the prizes of goods, and doe not doubt but shall take money as well as they. On Monday last Captain Churchey sett saile for Arda. In few dayes God willing sha ll send November accompt. 313. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 17 Dec. 1682 This morning I received yours, and as to the Companys affaires here I thank God all is verry well, though but little trade att present, for I find the Dutch are a kind of cunning sort of underminding people; they have sent a bendy to our Arcanies here to gett them send mony's to them; soe I have sent some to theirs; and have had them here twice or thrice, and tould them would sell them goods as cheape as they; and they have promised to come to mee; I expect some of them this weeke, they come some times but once in a fortnight and they say the Dutch sells sheets for I angle apeece. lnclosed is November accompt, which hope will find right and makenote accordingly; there wants 5 ounces 15angles for the bal lance, which shall sendwith more money as itt comes in per first good oppertunity. In the 9m sent per EvanPrice was 2m 4o la on November accompt, and by Francis Nixon 10 arkes, soe 5ounces, 15 angles makes the ballance of that accompt. 314. Richard Thelwa ll Annamaboe , 2 Jan. 1682/3 Yesterday I received yours, and have spoken to the Cabasheers about the two slavesthat ran away, they tell mee they will doe what they can if (they] should come inthese parts. And as soone as the ships appears shall send a whiteman to Amersa tosee the shells measured. Captain Branfill hath the letter for Thorne,53 hee presentshis service to your honour, hee saith will saile tomorrow in the evening. 315. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 4 Jan. 1682/3 Yesterday I received yours by Mr Lewin, and as in ordered I have made inquiryabout the powder and I cannot hearc of any more then 2 barrells that was boughtout of an interloper; and for to search their houses l have not force enough, and ifhee hath any I suppose itt must be to windward, for I cannot understand hath soldany here, but what Cormanteen or Agga people doe I cannot understand , as yett. Isent one aboard with Mr Lewin to wittness what was don. I have received all thegoods by the Busse, James Bayley [Commander] and have given creditt for accord.ingly, but as long as these ships undersell mee I cannot take any money. 316. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 7 Jan. 1682/3 Yesterday I received two of yours and have made inquiry after Captain Maplesslaves and boat but as yett I cannot heare any thing of them. I shall alsoe gett whatgreen birds 1can and as soon as possible. 317 . Richard Thelwa ll Annamaboe , 17Jan. 1682/3 Last night I received yours, and when Captain Cope comes bee shall have whatcome your Honour have ordered him. Likewise have made noate to take a largerquantity for store. Yesterday Captain Maples sett saile for Angola. 318. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 18Jan. 1682/3 This comes by Captain Cope whoe can informe your Honour. As concerning of trade, as long as these interlopers stay here I cannot take any money for they undersell mee, they sell perpetuano's at 6 and 7 angles, sayes att 12 and 13 angles fanteen money,54 and other goods accordingly. Indeed since I came here from Cabo Corsoe att Christmas I can hardly take money to pay the Whitemen and blacks this month. There hath been 10 interlopers since Christmas. This day two sett saile, and J beleeve the Dutch furnish themselves with goods out of them, but I hope they are all gon and then I dont doubt but shall have a good trade againe. Tomorrow God willing Captain Cope will have all his come aboard, the 5 hand canoe kickade .voo'd55 with 8 chests come and was all lost. I have been troubled with vommitting this 4 or 5 dayes or else had sent December account, but shall send itt by first oppertunity. 319. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 23 Jan. 1682/3 Yesterday I received you.rs with a pacquett for Captain Cope but hee was gone above 4 houres before, soe I have returned itt againe, hee stayed till betwixt 12 and l for the letters. As to James Mills, for a certaine hee is drownded att Allampo and two of the canoemen, the goods all lost, and the canoe broken all to peeces. Here is come one or two of rogue Bonishee's men here; itt seemes James Mills was to have been factor for rogue Bonishee att Allampo. The canoe and one Whiteman is gon to Amersa. I have the two canoemen from Captain Cope. Yesterday the Dutch Copeman of Cormanteen sent to mee two Whitemen and desired mee for to keepe the men here and in a small time they will send mee two for them. The canoe was an old canoe and broken all to peeces, itt is left aboard ship. Yesterday appeared a ship off Amersa, his boate was aboard Captain Cope, itt seems one Captain Davis, [he] is bound for the Bite. As to trade art present itt is glutted for here hath been soe many interlopers that hath spoyl'd itt, butt hope in a small time itt will come againe (Patience). lnclosed is December account, which hope will find right and make noate accordingly. Indeed I had sent it sooner but I have not been well this 10 day's; yesterday was my ill day, but I hope when gott something from Docter Meade itt will remove the distemper. This morning all our Capasheers came here about Ampeteens pallavora, they brought 3 sheepe but I told them that would not doe, I bid them goe to Capo Corsoe, soe then they desired mee for to give them Ampeteens chests, but I told them they should not have them till the pallavora was over, soe they went away angry. 320. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 8 Feb. 1682/3 Yesterday I received yours, and this morning I sent up Francis Nixon to Cabo Corsoe in a canoe with the ballance of Decembers accompt and January, alsoe 5 marks on February accompt, which hope will arrive before this. I sent IO marks, 5 angles and 7 tacco's in all. As to trade I have but little, only last Monday and Tuseday I tooke 4 in 5 marks, which was most for sheets. As money comes in I shall send itt to your honour, but the Arcanies doe not come every weeke. In a little time I shall want sheets and marked iron barrs, they will be the first I shall want, which may please to send per first good oppertunity. The other day I opened a bale of perpetuano's and they were all rotten with salt water, all but 5 or 6, Francis Nixon can inf01me your honour. As to any thing elce here all is well. 321. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 9 Feb. 1682/3 This serves chiefe ly for covert to the inclosed Januarys accompt, which hope will find right and make note accordingly. By Francis Nixon I have sent to your honour IO marks, 5 angles and 7 taccoes of good Arcanie gold, whereof l mark 2 ounces I angle and 9 tacco's being the ballance of Decembers accompt and 3 marks, 6 ounces, 3 angles and IO tacco's on January's accompt, and 5 marks on Februarys accompt , makes in all !Om Oa Sa 7ta. I must begg your honours pardon that I have not writt oftener nor sent the accompt, for I am not as yett throughly well. May please per first good oppertunity for to send a good quantity of sheets and marked iron barrs, for them I shall first want, and 3 pound basons. 322. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 12 Feb. 1682/3 Just now I received yours whereby I understand you desire to know what quantity of iron bans I wanted. I spoke to the Arcanies; they say 1,000will be gone in a little time if marked barrs, and noe flawes in them, and 20chests of sheets, or what your honour can spare. I have but halfe a chest of sheets left, and some 3 pound basons, the other wiU not goe off. As to the news of the country the Captain of the Por.tugueze of Anishan and the Quarranteer can not agree, and hee would remove from Anishan and take his people and his things; some say hath gott most part of his best things aboard the ship. The ship for this 2 dayes hath panyard Annamaboe and Anishan canoes, and att Accra they have panyard a 11 hand canoe of Annamaboe peoples full of cowes; and they say when they deliver up their whitemen and things they will deliver up their men and things. 56 Indeed these Fanteeners are all great rogues and there is noe doeing with them unless [you] sett other nations and them by land. They want warrs.57 323. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 28 Feb. 1682/3 Last night I received yours, whereby I understand there was a Company's ship arrived and that [you] desired to know what goods I most wanted. Att present I only want sheets and 3 pound basons. As to come per former order to keepe a store, I have above 900 chests , and when this ship hath taken her come I shall fill the come room againe, but shall not lett them know any thing, if should they would quickly raise the price, for these people are all greate rogues. 324. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, IOMarch 1682/3 Last night I received yours, whereby I understood what goods I wanted I should be supplyed by Captain Woolliford, for which give your Honour many thankes, and as inordred this morning I send Millington for Capo Corsoe Castle. The last ship that came downe here was a Frenchman as the Blacks sayes, he sett saile last night. As to Aga palavera they would not lett John Ratclifte have any thing to eat or drinke there for this 2 dayes, and last night they sent Arda Jack and his wife hither, I left them to helpe John Ratclifte there, and this morning John Ratclifte hath been heere to fetch his chest and other things there, soe they lett him take his things but would not lett him take the key of the doore, soe I bid him take an account of the benches and windows that was there etc., and when he asked for the key they thrnst him away and bid him begon. I sent them word last night if any bench etc. was missing , one day will come when they must pay for it. Indeed these people may very well say their Braffoe is a foole, for they all doe what they please. They want warrs here to make them poore, and untill then I feare they will never be at quiett. 325. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 12 March 1682/3 On the 10th instant I received yow-s, and as to hazard a fight with these Fanteen rogues I beleive I could, for I have wood water and come enough , but I want granadoe shells and firelocks, bandileirs and swords for the people. Nay I veryly beleive it will not be Jong ere they play the rogue againe, when they must be sure to have some mischeife come to them. But if your Worship could gett some other nation to come by land and bume their houses and sell their wives and children for slaves, take their come and all they have, [that] will make them humble. Inclosed is February account, which hope will find right and make noat accordingly. By Francis Nixon I now send 7 marks, 1 ounce, 15 angles of good Arcanie gold, which with 5 marks sent the 9th ditto makes the ballance of February account. [PS] In few dayes it is hoped the palavera with Cabesa Terra will be over and then trade will be open.58 326. Richard ThelwaJI Anamaboe, 20 March 1682/3 Last night l received yours, and to my opinion I beleive it is the best way for to sendto the Braffo to acquaint him of all these people[sl roguery, and if they dont givesatisfact ion to sett some othe r neighbouri ng nation on them, for to bring them to, as the Dutch doe, and then they will be glad to come to the English for help, and[ourselves] not to be seen, but as friends to their friends. The goods in CaptainWoolliford arc coming on shoare, and the come agoeing off, but at present littletrade by reason of the interlopers continually coming. 327. Richard Thelwall Anamaboe, 22 March 1682/3 Last night I received yours whereby I understand Captain Rickard and Captain Lowis on the coast, and that Captain Waugh is at Capo Corso. I have acquainted CaptainWoollifords two mates, to tell him that your Honour desires him to stay untilSaterday; and then he should not faile of his dispatches. This day Captain Woolli.fords come will be all aboard. As to the Fanteens they are as great rogues as everthey was. Yesterday they beat John Ratclift as he was looking for to see the comegoe downe to the waterside. I sent to the Captain of the towne and Mareene andthey have put the man in irons and they say they will punish him. Indeed l beleive veryly they will never be quiett unless they have war to bring them low, which mustbe done by some neighbouring nation and they not know who it is that setts themon; and then they would be glad to come to the English for help. (PS] I am forct at present not to take much notice, for if should would not let the come nor anything come in or goe out here. 328. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 31 March 1683 Last night I received yours, and as inordred God willing on Sunday I shall goe forCabo Corso Castle and shall bring what gold I have. Just now l received another ofyours with an order to gett about 1500 chests of come, which shall be effected assoone as possible; but must desire your Honour to keep the shipps there as long asmay be, and not for to come all togeather, for if they doe they will raise the price,and now come growes scarce, and these people are cunning rogues. I shall see ifthere be a 9 hand canoe to be sold and the lowest price. 329. (receipts] Anamaboe 23 March 1682/3 Received on board the Lisbon Merchant from Mr Richard Thelwall for the use ofthe Royall Affrican Company 450 chests of come, I say received per me William Woolliford Anamaboe 11 April 1683 Received then of Mr Richard Thelwall 500 chests of come for account of the Royall Affrican Company of England and use on board the ship Blessing by Samuell Rickard Anamaboe 17 April (83) Received of Mr Richard Thelwall 260 chests of corne for account of the Royall Affrican Company of England and for the use of the ship Eaglett of London by me John Waugh 330. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 19 Apr. 1683 Last night I received yours and as inordered have had the accompt of Captain Lowes corrected, which inclosed I now send per the bearer, and the ounce of gold hee will pay to mee, which by first good oppertunity shall send with what gold I have of the Companys and March accompt as soone as the corne is all aboard, which I hope will be in few dayes. These Fanteen people for these 4 or 5 dayes have been att warr with the Dutch att Cormanteen and have panyard 20 in 30 of their slaves as they went for water and wood and have sent them to Fanteen, and yester .day the Dutch shutt up their Castle gates, for these people will not lett them have any thing to eate or drink. I see I am not alone, but these people play the rogue with all people. The Dutch have 25 Whitemen and more Blacks, 4 flankers and 16 guns, but for ought I see dont care for to meddle with these people. These people say they will have custome for all Dutch ships that goes to the Mina. 331. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 20 Apr. 1683 Just now I received yours, and as to the settling of Agga factory, Mr Burrowes may goe for Agga when bee pleaseth and shall have what goods I have here as inordered, but if any thing should prove otherwise then, well, I must not be responsable, but only for my selfe, if all be in one accompt, though Mr Burrow's is a verry good husband, yett Mr Hassell gave security in England. Captain Lowe hath 570 chests come measur'd, which is all I have att present. 332. Thomas Burrowes Annamaboe, 20 Apr. 1683 Mr Thelwall shewed mee your order and the rest of the Gentlemen of the Councill for my goeing to Agga, for which I give your Honour thanks. The house att present is out of repaire for want of thatch , but suppose Mr Thelwall will in a short time take care to repaire itt. I hope your honour and the Councill have taken into con.sideration that I cannot live there for the same sallary that I have here, and although I eate now al Mr Thelwalls table I doe not expect to put up a penney of my sallary,but be thankfull to him to except of the same for my dyett. I find that the customeof the place is to give the Cabosheers of the place both morning and evening dramsand that they dayly expect itt, therefore hope there will be an allowance for itt. Ithought fittto give your honour an accompt of itt, for although I have given but my owne security I will not make soe bold with the Companys goods as to give a bittof them in dashey's to the Blacks , which I know will be expected of mee, till suchtime as I know whether my sallary will bear itt. Your Honour is sencible that mystock is but small, therefo re am unwilling to run beyond itt; therefore humbly beggyour pardon for what Jhave writt. 333. [rece ipts) Annamaboe, 24 April 1683 Then received of Mr Richard Thelwa11550 chests corne aboard the MerchantsBonadventure for the use of the Royall Company s slaves per mee John Lowe More received I man and 4 woemen for the Royall Company's accompt. per mee John Lowe Annamaboe, 24 April 1683 Received aboard the Jacob Pinke of Mr Richard Thelwall 30 chests come for theuse of the Royall Company per mee Thomas Woolman Annamaboe, 24 April 1683 Received of Mr Richard Thelwall Cheife factor for the Royall Affrican Companyof England att Annamaboe I woe men slave and a child on board of the MerchantsBonadven ture Captain Lowe Commander per mce William Jumper 334. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, l May 1683 Just now I received [yoursl, whereby I understand Captain Richard Lumley wasarrived in one of the Companys ships, and verry shortly were more expected. Asinordered I have made note for to gett what come possible I can, but att presen t ittgrowes scarce and if these Fanteen rogues should know there is a want of comethey would quickly raise the price, but I never Jett them know till the ships co meinto this roade for itt. As to slaves here they are scarce and good slaves, men are 7pease 2 angles and woemen 6 pease 2 angles, nay some people give a bendy for aman. Jnclosed is March accompts and the receipts for come and slaves, which hopewill find right and make noate accordingly; And God willing in few dayes shallsend Aprill months accompt with their ballance. When I was att Cabo Corsoe last I paid Mr Walter Stapl eton 6 marks of gold on March months accompt, soe thereremaines on that accompt 2 marks, I ounce, 13 angles and 10 tacco's, and as soone as possible shall send that and the ballance of Aprill accompt altogether. This morning the Quantrees Tetee was here and I have sent all Whiteman and some Blacks with him for to take possession of Agga factory, for the house wants a greate deale of repairing and thatching, but would desire your honour when the house is fitting to put goods in you would send what goods your honour thinks fitting from Cabo Corsoe, for if should come from mee they would never be att peace with mee nor I should never bee att quiett here. I suppose Mr Burrowes expects an answer from your honour of the letter hee sent. Last night came in Agga roade Captain How an interloper, hee comes from Allampo. 335. Thomas Burrow's Annamaboe, 3 May 1683 I have yours of the 1st instant, for which I give your honour thanks and shall observe the contents of and repaire myselfe to Agga as soone as the house is fitted, which I suppose will be don by Satureday next, where I shall endeavour to advance the Royall Companys interest as much as in mee ly's. 336. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 4 May 1683 Yesterday I received yours, and as to Agga Factory itt will be ready on Monday next for to goe thither. Soe if your honour sends the sloope with goods they shall be landed as inordered and suppose Mr Burrowes will goe but hee will want brandy and I have but 30 gallons left, which will not last both places but a little, while Mr Burrowes desires mee for to have Michaeli Millington for to goe with him to Agga, I tould him hee should, soe thought fitt to acquaint your honour. The corne roome att Agga must be all new built, which shall be don as soone as possible, for the thatch is almost all off, and the poles are all rotton. I shall send some Ardars and a woeman to Agga to helpe Mr Burrowes in any thing hee shall want. I have about 100 chests come and have sent up in the country for the people to bring their come downe, but itt doth not come as fo1merly by reason itt grows scarce. I shall gett what possible I can. 337. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 6 May 1683 Last night I received yours. As to come I have 100 and odd chests but I cannot tell whether I shall gett enough come betwixt this and Wensday for Captain Lumley, but desire your honour for to keepe him till this day sennitt59 for now they are forct to send up in the country a great way for their come, I shall seeke for to gett itt as soone as possible may be. As to goods proper for Agga, iron barrs, lead ba1TS, sayes, perpetuano's , sheets, paper brawles, and Guyney clouts etc., what your Honour thinks fitting, but itt would be convenient the sloope be here 2 or 3 dayes before theship comes here, for itt will be a great trouble for to land the goods here and sendthem afterwards a mile by land to Agga. Mr Burrowes hath been troubled with apaine in his head and bones, I suppose gott cold. Francis Nixon hath been ill this10 day's. Old Harrey, old Charles, John Ratlife, they have been all ill, but thanksbe to God they are all on the mending hand. As to a canoe, here is none to be gottfor love nor money. I and Mr Burrows wants wrighting paper and inke and somebrandy for Mr Burrow 's, for I have but little left. 338. RichardThelwall Annamaboe,7 May 1683 This is by the reques t of Mr Burrow's that your honour would be pleased to lettDocter Meade come to see him this night, for the last night hee had a voyolentfcavour and noe ague, which is soe much the worse, hee expects his feavo ur thisnight, hee is alsoe verry dryc and nothing will stay with him but water, and hath agreat painc in all his bones, hee hath sweated for this 3 dayes and saith is verrywcake. Indeed I never knew a lustic young man soe faint hearted as hee is, socdesires if possible that Docter Meade may come, if not that hee would send himsomething that may abate his feavour. 339. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 10 May 1683 Just now I received [yours), and as to Mr Burrows, since the Docters mate hathblooded him and gave him two glisters his feavour hath something abated but hee is verry weake, and as the people that looke after him say they never see a man soefaint hearted as hec is, and in grace of God hee may doe well againe if his faintheartedness dont cast him downe againe. Mr Burrow's likewise desires your honour would be pleased that the Docters mate may stay with him till the ship comes downehere. Our Cabasheers have been in the country att Abbra this 5 dayes amake ing anew Captain there,60 soe this week I have gott but little come. Tbeleeve I may haveupwards of200 chests, but tomorrow expect our Cabashcers here and for once musttake in come of a Sunday. I have gave some of them goods beforehand to buy comeand doe not doubt before Captain Lumley hath taken what come I have that I shallgelt enough for him, though the interloprs all present hinder mee, for they give 2angles per chest. Tomorrow morning God willing if wind and weather doth pennittI shall send Francis Nixon with Aprill account and aJlsoe the ballance , and alsoewhat hens possible l can gett. Annamaboe, 11 May 1683 340. Richard Thelwall This serves che ifly for covert to the inclosed Aprill months accompt, which hope willfind right and make noate accordingly. By Francis Nixon I now send 2 marks, 1 ounce, 13 angles and 10 tacco's being the ballance of March accompt. And alsoe 4 marks, 2 ounces 11 angles and 10 tacco's being the ballance of Ap1ills months accompt; in all 6 marks, 4 ounces, 9 angles and 8 tacco's. Att present two interlopers in these roads, one in Anishan roade and the other in Agga roade, soe but little trade. The first goods I shall want will be sheets, which may please to send per first good oppertunity. 341 . Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 11 May 1683 Since I writt this morning I have received a letter from Charles Towgood that two Frenchmen that came downe last night have taken Captain Lumley and one inter .loper,61 and itt will not be long ere the other is taken and I am getting all the canoes I can for to gett the goods out of Captain Charles, soe in hast att present. 342. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 14 May 1683 Last night I received yours, and as to a chirurgeon of an interloper being att Agga, there is one Richard Pearse, but I assure your honour there is none here, and indeed Mr Burrowes though unknowne to mee did send for him, or else noe interloper will come to this place. I suppose the blacks of Agga doe protect him, but if hee comes here I shall send him for Cabo Corsoe Castle. Truly itt was Mr Burrow's his fault , hee is verry weake and verry faint hearted, yesterday hee had his feavour verry voyolent. This morning I sold all the sheets I have , except about 6 old broken ones, and 48 blew and green perpetuano's, one with the other. 343. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 15 May 1683 Last night arrived in Anishan roade one of the interlopers that the Frenchmen taken, most barbarously used, they told the canoemen that Captain Lumley lay att Lague, most desperatly wounded and his ship disabled. They have taken out all the goods, water etc., they Jett only Captain Lumley and Captain Summervills ships goe. Agent Pearsons attendant and Captain Thompsons ships they tooke with them, they are resolved for to have a bout with the Companys ships att Arda , for they think 62they have gold chests, and they are resolved for to have them, soe thought fitt to acquaint your honour [so] that Captain Luml ey may have some helpe sent him. 344. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 17 May 1683 Last night came on shoare here Captain Thompson and his docter, that their shipwas taken by the Frenchmen and they kept their ship. They most barbarouslyabused them, such punishments noe one never heard of, they put their yards63 in avice and their thumbs, they say Captain Summervills mate wont live, they willinforme your Honour of all passages. As per your former order I have sent them upto Cabo Corsoe Castle. The Arcany's have been att mee for more sheets. 345. Richard Thelwall Annamab oe, 23 May 1683 Yesterday I received yours, whereby l understand [you] did wonder that Aggafactory was not repaired. ln answer, ever since I had your honour s order, the nextday I sent a white man and Blacks with thatch from hence and they had mended allthe dwelling house, but the come roome will aske a greate time for to fetch poulesand thatch; besides itt must be ready to putt on before the old thatch be taken off,for feare the raines should wash the walls downe. I am sure there is never an Englishman here will say or write soe, but whomesoever did, did itt undeserving. YesterdayMr Burrows and Michael Millington went to Agga with their things. Mr Burrow'sexpects fresh goods from Cabo Corsoe, the goods proper for that place, iron barrs,and lead barrs, sayes, perpetuanoe's, sheets, course sletias, and what your honourthinke fitting. The Arcany 's wants sheets and blew perpetuano's, for all the blewperpetuanoes I have are goo, for there is more green in a baile then blew, I havegreen, redd and printed perpetuanoes enough but they wont goe off here. There willwant brandy for Mr Burrowes for I have but little, as alsoe paper and inke. 346. [receipts] Annamaboe, 11April 1683Then received from Mr Richard Thelwall on board the Ann Sloope for account ofthe Royall Affrican Company of England l00 billitts of firewood for the use of thesaid sloope with l chest of come, per Charles Towgood Annamaboe, 29 May 1683Received from Mr Richard Thelwall aboard the Adventure Ketch upon the RoyallCompany's accompt 25 chests come per mee John Groome Annamaboe, 29 May 1683Received on board the Hopewell 320 chests come for the use of the Royall AffricanCompany from Mr Richard Thelwall Cheife of Annamaboe Castle per mee Richard Lumley Annamaboe, 30 May 1683 Then received from Mr Richard Thelwall on board the Ann Sloope for accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England 100 billitts of firewood and 2 chests of come for the use of the said sloope per mee Charles Towgood 347. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 1 June 1683 As to Mr Groome , hee sett saile on Wensday morning as soone as hee had got all his come aboard, and Captain Lumley had sett saile last night but hee hath broke a new cable and is forct for to stay for to sweepe for his anchor. I have made noate as in ordered aboute come and slaves, I hope before Satureday night for to have 8 in 900 chests come. As to tradeing, here they aske for nothing but blew pcrpetuano's and sheets and I have noe blew, I have a great many perpetuano's, greens, redds and printed, but they wont goe off unless have blews with them, for in any bale there is more green then blews. As to Agga all is well, but Mr Burrowes hee wants blew perpetuano's and writes for 8 deale boards for the warehouse, penns, inke and paper, and as for brandy I have but little which wont last both factory's not passing a month. 348. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 7 June 1683 This comes by Francis Nixon by whome I have sent your honour IOmarks of good Arcany gold, on May and June accompt, and God willing in few dayes shall send May accompt. May please to send per first good oppertunity some perpetuano's, sayes, sheets, and course sletias, for in sending goods to Agga and buying come makes the warehouse looke thin. Though I have green and redd and printed per.petuano's, yett they wont goe off without blews, and I never sold any but one with another, but there is more green in every bale then blew, besides redds. 349. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 10 June 1683 Last night I received yours by the sloope, and God willing tomorrow morning shall gett all the goods ashoare, there being 4 bailes of perpetuano's, 4 cases of sayes, 4 cases of course sletias and IO chests of sheets, for which shall give creditt for, and sell them for the Companys best advantage and remitt the gold as soone as in cash. 350. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 20 June 1683 lnclosed is May months account and alsoe the receipts for come, which hope will find right and make noate accordingly. On the 7th instant I sent 10 marks of gold, whereof 8 marks 3 ounces and 6 angles being the ballance of May account and I marke, 4 ounces, 10 angles on June account, and now I send by Francis Nixon 12 marks, 3 ounces and 6 angles, which make with the I marke, 4 ounces and 10 angles, just 14 marks on this months June account. May please to send per firstgood oppertunity a good quantity of sheets and sayes, for att present they are inrequest. And the people of Agga say I dont write for goods such as they would have,but I teJI them when your honour has gold for what has been sent, they shaJI havefresh goods, but I gett the ill will of the whites and Blacks because the goods arelanded here before they goe to Agga. 35 1. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 29 Jun e 1683 Yesterday I received yours, and immediately delivered the letter to Mr Shear es. Jam afraid the coast will never be cleare unless men of warr stay here to cleare theseplaces of those pyrates rogues. As to the pallavora about [ var. att] Annamaboe itt is almost ended, yett the Capashecrs has not taken away their trunks and boxes, mychamber being almost full of them. 352. Richard Thelwall Annamabo e, 7 July 1683 Last night l received yours, and God willing by Captai n Young I shall send whatgold I have in cash. Last night came a white man from Captain Groome, I suppo sehee hath some gold, but the seas runs soc bad that the canoes cannot gett corne off,soe I thought itt fitting for to send your Honours letters by land, and as soone as theweather perrnitts the canoe shall goe. 353. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 8 July 1683 Last night I received yours, and as inordere d I have sent all the money I have incash. This day by Captain Youn g, which is in all 11 marke of good Arcany gold onJune and July accompt. As to Michae li Millington I have spoke to him and he saithhee was a miller by trade, but att present hee is infirme in his legg, being troubl ed with noctema ll paines. 354. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 11 July 1683 Yours of the 9th instant I received, and as inordered I have taken accompt of theRoyall Affrican Companys concerns att Agga and sent Francis Nixon there, and assoo ne as the corne is measured and I have Mr Burrow s's accompt , I shall sen d h im for Cabo Corsoe. Last night departed this world Captain Clarks docter. 355. Richard Thelwa ll Annamaboe, 17 July 1683 This comes by Mr Thomas Bu1rnw's, and have adjusted with him the Companysconcernes and measured all his come, there being 255 chests. [ could not dispatch him before Captain Clarke and Mr Sheares were gon. May please for to send a good quantity of iron barrs marked, sheets and perpetuano's for the supply of this place and Agga. These people begin for to aske for iron ban-s and I have a greate many but they doe not like them, for they must be all marked and noe flau's in them. 356. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 18 July 1683 Last night I received yours, and suppose Mr Burrows was not arrived att Cabo Corsoe when [you) writt but I beleeve in a little time after, for hee went in my 3 hand canoe. As yett I cannot heare any news of the sloope, when doe as in ordered shall send them up immediatly, if stop here. May please per first good oppertunity to send a good quantity of iron barrs marked, sheets and perpetuano's. Indeed I have a greate many of iron barrs but they dont like them, some small and some not marked and some flawes and they wont goe off here nor att Agga. 357. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 24 July 1683 This serves cheiefly for covert to the inclosed June monthly accompt, which hope will find right and make noate accordingly. On my letter dated the 20th June past will see there was 14m on June accompt and on the 8th July l lm sent, soe there is on July months accompt 21m 40 14a 3ta. Yesterday morning arrived att Agga a great canoe to Yaboyes with cowes, as Francis Nixon w1ites mee, whoe saith Mr Groome was att Accra with slaves. 358. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 26 July 1683 Yesterday I received yours, and as inordered this day I have sent Andrea the Black bricklayer up to Cabo Corsoe Castle, and hope when your honour hath don with him will send hjm heither againe. I shall want one hundred or two of Bricks, and some lyme to repair some small breaches before the latter raines come. As to the Royall Companys affaires I thank God all is well here and att Agga, but Cabessa Terra people hath panyard several! of the Arcany's and their gold.64 Last night our Captain and severall Arcany's went to Cabessa Terra about the pallavora. Here is in towne now, 3 marks, 2 ounces for sheets and iron, and att Agga 4 marks. A good quantity of marked iron barres will goe off in a little time. 359. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 29 July 1683 Yesterday I received yours , and I have spoke to our Cabasheers about Quorruna and Epheba, if should come into these parts , that they may be seized on and brought tomee. Andrea the Black bricklayer is aJso come, for which I give your honour manythanks, but I want one hundred or two of bricks and some lyme. Last night came aship into the roade, I suppose Captain Phenney, as yctt noe body come ashoare andthey lye a great way off. 360. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 3 Aug. 1683 This morning I received yours, and I have received of Captain Phenney 5 bailes ofperpetuano 's, 200 iron barrs and 20 chests of sheets. Hee sett saile from hence thefirst of this month in the evening. As to trade here, the Arcany's as yeti are not comefrom Cabessa Terra, but sheets and iron barrs are att present most in request. Thesloope 65 is neare Amersa. 361. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 11 Aug. l683 Just now I received yours, and I understand that Captain Draper hath aboard , 1300 sheets, 300 iron barrs, and 120 broad blew baftas, the goods are a comeing ashoare,and for which said goods shall give the Royall Company creditt for. 362. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 26 Aug. 1683 This mornin g I received yours, and as to purcha se two 7 hand canoes, I beleeve ittis impossible, but I beleeve they may gett a 11 and 9 hand canoe, but they are verrydeare. When they come downe here they may make the bargaine themselves, for Ibought once a 11 hand canoe for Captain Shepheard and hee left ill on my hands.l shall assist them what I can and see for to gett men to goe to Lague with them, if I dont gett cano's here. May please for to send some perpetuano 's with the sheets and sayes. On Monday morning God willing I shall goe for Cabo Corsoe Castleand shall bring with mee what gold I have in cash. 363. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 10 Sept. 1683 This morning the Arcany's was here and now they buy only perpetuano's and sayesand they wont Jett mee alone till I write for more fresh sayes and pcrpetuano's fromCabo Corsoe Castle, they tell mee they have a greate deale of gold, but they wontbuy one sheete since the price is raised , soe thought fitting to acquaint your honourthat [you] may send by the first ship a good quant ity of perpetuano's and sayes. 364. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 18 Sept. 1683 Last night I received yours, and as to my opinion concerning Mr Hassell I beleeve itt will doe well for to make him bookkeeper, hee being bred up a merchant. As to the [O ounces itt had been sent before now, but I had not oppertunity, but God willing I shall send itt to morrow, and alsoe what gold I have of the Company 's . Here is a greate deale of gold for fresh sayes and perpetuanoes , but they desire a larger quantity against Monday next. 365. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 20 Sept. l 683 This serves cheifly for covert to the enclosed August monthly account and alsoe the receipts for come, all which I hope will find right and make note accordingly. This comes by Evan Price, by whome I have sent 32 marks, 1 ounce, 1 angle and 5 tacco's of good Arcany gold, whereof 10 marks, 1 ounce, I angle and 5 tacco's is on August accompt and 22 marks on September months accompt as per Mr Master's receipts will appeare. May please to send a good quantity of fresh sayes and perpetuano's per first good oppertunity, for here is a greate deale of gold in towne, and they are att mee every day to write for a larger quantity then came last, and would have them be here before Monday next which is their day of tradeing here. 366. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 21 Sept. 1683 Yours I have received, and doe understand that the 32 marks, I ounce, 1 angle and 5 tacco's was safe arrived att Cabo Corsoe. I have received per the two 9 hand canoes, 10 bailes of perpetuano's and 5 bailes of sayes, and as soone as the breeze is over, the canoes shall goe for Cabo Corsoe this evening. I understand that there is arrived at the Mine a greate Dutch ship, and the Copeman of Cormanteen this day is gon to the Mine, soe would willingly have some more sayes and per.petuano's, as soone as possible, for they are only in request att present, that [l] may gett what gold I can before the Dutch goods come, the Blacks reckoning them the better dye and collou rs. 367. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 22 Sept. 1683 This day I have received yours, and alsoe by the two 9 hand canoes, 12 cases of sayes. I have taken here this day 8 marks odd ounces and att Agga 2 marks odd ounces, att both places in all this day 11 marks of good Arcany gold. I hope on Monday for to gett all the Arcany's good gold before the Dutch goods arrive here, I meane in these part. There is I beleeve a cheate with the packers att home, or elce the Captains of ships, for I opened in 4 of perpetuano's, and there was not one blew perpetuano in itt, I meane one in the 4 bailes, but 18 greens and 7 redds, and att Agga Francis Nixon had but 9 blews in two bayles, therefore I feare shall want some blew perpetuano's for to helpe off with these sayes, for I make them take one with the other. The Arcany's have promis'd to be here on Monday next. I doe what I can to advance the Company's interest. 368. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 25 Sept. 1683 Last night I received yours, and as to the greene perpetuano's I said there was two bailes opened, one here and one att Agga, that had only greene and redds in them, noe blews. On Satureday and yesterday I have taken here and att Agga in all upwards of 20 marks of good Arcany gold, soe that all the gold is gon till more comes out of the country, which I suppose may be on Monday next. This morning is gon by to Cormanteene a greate canoe loaden with goods and the Blacks saith the Dutch sayes are of a better dye then ours. If [sic] my opinion is that if the green perpetuano's were lowered to 9 angles, they would goe off and helpe to putt off our sayes and wee might bauke the Dutch, and itt would be better then they should lye for the cockroaches and moaths to eate them, they being a commodity that will not goe off att present. As to come I have spoake to the Cabasheers and told them that at! Commenda, Caba Corsoe and other places, they sold for 1 [angle] a chest, but their answer is that wee have had but little raine this yeare and that they shall have but on[e) cropp this yeare and that Come will be verry deare and they wont sell soe, not under 1 angle and halfe per chest. I desire to know how damnified goods goes off att Cabo Corsoe for gold or come, that I may not make any error. 369. Richard Thelwall Annarnaboe, 25 Sept. 1683 Last night I received yours, and I have made noate about the sheets. Yesterday I writt my opinion concerning greene perpetuano's and what our people said about come. I understand the Dutch have most sayes come into these parts, soe if the greene perpetuano's be not lowered for to helpe off our sayes, I feare they will lye on hand, the Dutch sayes being of a better dye then ours. I desire to know how damnified goods goes off for gold or come, but I dare not trust goods for come here, if I should I never should see goods nor come, for I have severall gold pawnes, I cannot gett them for to redeeme them and they are of a long standing. 370. Richard Thelwall Annarnaboe, 26 Sept. 1683 Last night I received yours, and have made noate about lowering the prizes of goods, as soone as the Arcany's come downe, and doe not doubt but shall take money as well as the Dutch. I understand how goods were bartered for come, but I dare not trust any goods, if should I never should see goods nor come and they wont take 1 angle per chest. Yesterday all our Cabbasheers were att Anishan and they say that an Anishan canoeman was alt Cape Tres Punctas, where is now two greate ships a takeing in wood and water, they say Portuguze and that there is English and French men aboard, they say will take the Dutch ships. I feare they are the pyrates come on the coast againe. 371. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe, 2 Oct. 1683 Yesterday I received yours, and as to old come there is 225 chests at Agga. Captain Cole had all mine but 20 odd chests I keepe for my own spend ing. As I w[r]itt in my former letters, Tcannot buy come here under 1 angle and a halfe per chest, and our Capasheers will not sell under and I beleeve they buy up all the come them.selves. Last night came into this roade Captain Draper, hee saith hee will sett saile when the breaze comes in. This day thought lett him gett what come hee can off, his boate is gon to Agga for his come , for hee wont loose the windward currant. The ship that came downe the other day ly's in Anishan roade is an interloper, hee wont tell his ships name nor his owne, but the Blacks say they call him Capta in James and hee snuffles in the nose, that is all I can leame of the Blacks. As to trade itt is verry small att present , for I have taken but one bendy this two dayes of trade and that was for iron barrs, but I hope when the interloper is gon and the Dutch sayes, I shall have a trade againe. [PS] Captain Drapers 50 chests come is all on board. 372. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , 5 Oct. 1683 This morning I received yours, and as inordered, when Mr Sheares or Mr Groome comes shall put what slaves in [I] have in irons aboard. As to trade this weeke, has been verry small for I have taken but one bendy and that was in iron barrs. On Monday and Tuseday next, which is the dayes of trade with the Arcany's, I shall see what may be don. The Dutch sayes and sheets, the blacks like better then ours, but for come here the Blacks will have one angle and halfe per chest, and if [you] will give mee an order for to give soe I may gett new come, but otherwise I cannot, There is 205 chests of old come att Agga, which is all is left. 373. Richard ThelwaU Annamaboe , 27 Oct. 1683 Yesterday I received yours and imediatly I delivered Captain Browse his letters; hee sett sayle yesterday after dinner . As to the Royall Companys affaires, I thank God all is weU but little gold stirring att present. Captai n James the interloper for this fortnight hath spoyled the trade here, now the ships are gon I hope tradeing may be good againe. 374. Richard Thelwall Annamaboe , l l Nov. 1683 This morning Treceived yours, and as inordered I have sent a Whiteman to Amersato see they make good measure and good shells. There is in Agga roade the oldinterloper Captain James. This is the fifth or sixth Monday hee hath beene here andif any money should come out of the country I feare [he] will spoyle the trade here. 