V EGYA The RAC factory at Egya ('Agga'), east of Anomabu, had been established by 1674.1 [ts history durin g the period 168 l-3 is not altoget her clear. The initial series of correspondence from it terminate s in March I 681, though without any explicit indication that the factory was about to be abandoned .2 It seems, in fact, that the factory was either contin ued or quickly re-estab lished, since it appears from the Anomabu correspondence (nos 236-7) that it was in existence in September, when most of the goods were removed, though the Egya people were assured that more goods would be sent and one white man was left there. This sole white man was James Conduit!, who wrote one Jetter from Egya in October 1681 (no.384). Al.though Cunduitt returned to Anomabu shortly afterward (cf. no.247), it does not appear that the Egya factory was wholly abandoned, since its rebuild ing was under discussion in December 1681 (no.252), and in May 1682 John Ratelif was sent to look after it (no.272). In March 1683 Ratcliff was still at Egya, and involved in a 'palaver' with the local people (no.324), and he may have been obliged to withdraw, since in April 1683 another man, Thomas Burrows, was appointed to take charge of the Egya factory (no 332). After delays due to ill health. Burrows finally left Anomabu for Egya in May (no.345). Only a single letter from Burrows at Egya survives, in July 1683; but it seems clear, from subsequent references in the Anomabu corre spondence (nos 367, 368, 373) that the factory continued to be occupied. The fragmentary character charac ter of the Egya corresponde nce may mean only that after March 1681 the factory normally reported to the fort at Anomab u, rather than directly to Cape Coast Castle. The Egya facto ry took some gold, but was probably principally important for the supply of com to slave-ships. Like Anashan and Anomabu, Egya lay within the state of Fante; hence, early in 1681 , the chief of Egya was sent to negotiate with the RAC at Cape Coast by 'the King and Quantrees of Fanteene ' (no.379). 375. Ralph Hassell Agga, 28 Jan. 1680/1 I had not been guilty of silence had I not this misfortune befallen mce which by theloss of upwards of 200 ounces of blood has soe weakened me that I have not beenin a capac ity to write to your Honour before now, which I hope will not be imputedas a crime to me. A soone as I am able shall by your order pay my due respects toyou and bring up with me an exact accompt of all things belonging to my mastersthe Royall Affrican Company which I inventoryed at the takein charge of thisfactory, not being able to inlarge now. 376. Richard ThelwaJl Agga, 6 Feb. 1680/1 This morning I received yours, and according as in ordcr[ed] have taken care thisnight for to send all the goods of most importe for Annamaboe, imprirnis I 7 saycs,4 chestes of sheetes, 39 ginghames, 10 halfe firkines of tallowe, and Mr Hassellhath Captain Coffee here and his people, which will have a care of what remaines,being ordinary goods, and if any occation shall send hclpe from Annamaboe. Thiscomes by Mr Hassell. 377. Ralph Hassell Agga, 13 Feb. 1680/ L According to order have putt on board the Prosperous , Captain Henry Clarke Commander 9 woemen slaves and 140 musquctts, 300 chestes of come which arethe Company['s], allso 2 peices firr and 60 peices of timber. I paid 2 ounces and 4angles for them all and hope your Honour will allowe mee the same, which I beggyour Honourr will signifie to mee by first oppertunity. What other goods are hereare convenient for buying of come, soe Mr Thelwall thinkes meete they remaynehere. For what othere slaves are here four Arda men, one woeman, two boyes,which are reques sctt to bee here for to tume and shift the come, nevertheless if youplease to have two men up they shall come up by land, for they will not runn away.If you please to send a baile of lapseelcs which will vend here for come or moneyatt 6a per pcice, allsoe nicconees, wich goods doe not vend at Cape Corse. Here is left u[w]pards of 300 chestes of come. I had a great deale of trouble in sending ofthe musquetts ofif], the people would not suffer for them to goe out of the factoryand say nothing more shall goe, soe beleivc within 2 or 3 dayes some of theCapusheires will be up with you. 378. Ralph Hassell Agga, 13Feb. 1680/1 This comes per Captain Cophes people, who hath been here ever since I began toremove away goods for feare any molestation, which I metl with but little till the140 musquetts went aboard. I advised your Honour this mominge of what come slaves &ca are aboard Capta in Clarke, which letter I deliverd to Captain Clarke. Here is now onely some iron barres, lead barrs, L2narrow dammagged nicconnees, 4 red playnes, 7 verry corse sletias, 10 diglins and 5 brass panns old, and upwards of 300 chests come, with 4 Arda men, I woeman and 2 boyes. The 4 men watch a nights, the woeman makes them cankey, the I boy is a cooke, the othere if occation serves to send on messages to Cape Coste. Findeing all things right pray signifie your Honours minde therein. Agga, I 9 Feb. 1680/1379. Ralph Hassell These comes to your hands per Captain Yankey, the Captain of Agga,3 who is sent to you on purpose per the King and Quontree s of Fanteene. 4 They have been several\ times with mec to buy goods, which I have not, and would know the reason why they cannot bee supplyd as formerly, butt that I sent the goods to Annamaboe, to which queries I made answer I followed my Generalls order, and reason'd with them as much as could and used as many forcible arguments to induce them to beleive theire was not any goods att Cape Corso to supply this place and other out factoryes, so they have sent the bearer to your Worship to dispute the buisness that they may be the better satisfyed. The Cheife of thee Quontrees (which Griffin knowes what hee is) told me that if thee factory was not continued that there shou Idbee noe trade at Annamaboe, for hee would stop the passage to Annamaboe, and that all boors5 should come and bring come to this factory, and that they would take it in theire own hands and sell it to interloopers and purchase goods for themselves, soe that noe English ship for the future should have any come and by that meanes theire voyages would be ruined. What their intentions are I leave it to your judicious consideratioons, this being the verrity of what was said to mee. Read it verbatem and lett Griffin interp ritt it to the bearer, and he will verrifie the same. They binde me to stay as a pawne till the bearers retume. Agga, 23 Feb. 1680/1380. Ralph Hassell Yours I received per via Annamaboe from Mr Thelwall and understand what he wrote that the Quantrees man had said nothing to him about what rwrote you, which per adventure might cause a suspition in you that I should write the thinges that were erronious, butt in the future you will find the verrity confirmed. In Mr Belwoods time there were noe factor that had given security, which was the reason, nor Mr Belwood hjmselfe, and I quaere if it be not soe now. It wilJ be noe dischargeto mee to render an account to any one butt your selfe and the Royall Company,with whomc I have contracted to that purpose. If I write not reason pray Jett mebegg the favour to know what I err in and it shall be rectifycd. Had I the goods thathas been sent to Annamaboc I could remitt more money than ever has been remitted from thence, which if you had the accoums would appeare. Your Worship writesme not a woard aboute the slaves I sent per Captain Clarke, the musquettes andtimber liekwise. I could vend IOor 12 barrells of powder for come, allsoe tapseeles is requiredhere. if your Worship please to send the great canoe with neccessaryes, as powder,tapseeles, nicconees etc., I will load here [= her] up with woode, wruch suppose may be wanted att Cape Corso for bricke, lyme etc., and if have yowá order canfurnish you with what wood you shall want. I pray your candid construction of thisfor it is nothing butt verrity. [PS] I begg an answer per messenger if you please to favour mee with one. 381. Ralph Hassell [undated] 1npursuance to your order with Counce lls of yesterdays dayte I have here inclosedsent an inventory of all the co[n)cems of my masters the Royall Affrican Companyof England at this place, which hope may be sattisfactory.Your Honour allsoe requires an account what goods sold till the 29 last past,which was onely 6 barrs iron and I corse sletia, which being soe small I transmitt it to this month account and remaine debitor till further order, and shall be ascarefull for my masters intrest and my owne creditt as may render myselfe boathto theirs and yours good likeing. Here hath been these two dayes all theCapusheeres of this place, who dunns me much for the useuaJI custome of a newfactors comeing to a factory, which they say and indeed hath been ever heretoforeallowed. Theire demands are l anchor brandy, I perpetuanoe, I greene Welchplayne or othere couler but red, and 3 yards blew broad cloth. I would not give anything till I had your order, butt they are soe obstinate they will have that or as much,soe begg your answer and then I may govern myselfe as you shall perscribe. If yourHonour can spare some course sletias, a bale of tapseeles amd perpetuanoe s, with200 barrs iron that are a11markt, l question not but in a months time to take 20m ofgold, for theise things are much inquired for per the Arcanyes that are now comedowne. 382. Ralph Hasse ll Agga, 3 March 1680/1 This comes per Coophe, who hath been rousawing his ground for come and desired to be the bearer of a letter to your Worship, though have onley to informe you that yesterday I delivered my months account to Mr Thelwall and yesterday Captain Bowler sayld, aboard whome I putt 2 boyes and furnished him with what wood he wanted, which was 670 sticks . When I demanded a receipt he would give it lieu of timber put ashoar at Cape Corso , which I was unwilling to take till I had Mr Thelwalls approbation. I have rumiged and found the othere musquett , which sent per the bearer. I cou ld wish a supply of goods such as you can best spare, for now I have nothing butt lead, iron, playnes 2. ps, and 10 diglins. I bought a considerab le quantity of come last month, it begins to be scarce, that quantity is good. I want some powder, tapseeles broad, and nicconees, blew bafts, if you please to send them to Annamaboe, and what other sort of goods you please. ***** 383. James Cunduitt Agga, 4 Oct. 1681 The Cabisheers came lo mee to demand the reason why the factory was with.drawne.6I declared I did not know but did beleeve the unkindness was the cause. I did declare the covenant was broke that they made with Agent Mellish 7 at the settlement of the same, which covenant I did declare in regard I was present at the same time, and some other wrongs which the Company have received, soe Braffo and Quantree s and Cabisheers of Abbra and Cabisheers of Agga and Mareens doe declare they will make good the covena nt they made with Agent Mellish, which covenant is this, that noe slaves shall be carryed aboard any interloper whatsoever but first brought into the factory, and they shall have the refusal) of them, and that noe money shall be carryed aboard any interloper, and if any one doe the goods shalJ be seazed by the Marens for the Braffo and Company , which covenant was in force since I ca me to Agga to live, and I can give an account how it was broke, that noe interlopers men shall be suffered to come to Agga ashoare but be panyard. They desire that Mr Thelwall be chiefe and I may remayne with him. The Braffo will imploy some to looke after the factory that shall pay for what goods are stole and what slaves brake away, if not taken shall be paid for, and what lost in old Braffo's time this Braffo wilJ not concerne himselfe with. The Cabisheers would not be satisfied unless I would write to your honour about this, for which I hope your honour will pardone my boldness in soe doeing. This new Braffo hath been a trader with the English in my time, I doe know him. They desire your answer and will further waite uppon your honour as you will appoint. There was severaJI present att the writting hereof , and they have been with Mr Thelwall about this business. ****** 384. Thomas Burrowes Agga, 8 July 1683 I have yours of the 7th instant, and am sorry to heare that my practices or behaviouramongst the Blacks, now I have given them almost halfe I have in the country,should be soe ill as to cause any of them to give your honour falce reports of mee.I can safely say I have not a word of differance with any black since I came to thisplace, which your Honour may be better inform'd by the Whitemen that has livedwith mee. You are pleased to tax mee with entertaining the master of an interloper.Its true that since I came here that one Hudson, whoe was master of an interloperfrom Barbado's, came ashoare here and being my verry entimate freind told meehee made bold to come up to the house to see mee, haveing a letter for mee fromBarbado's. I desired him to goe from hence, which accordingly hee did, and I am sure was not halfe an houre asboare. I was not att that time capeable to entertainehim or to seize him, haveing the feavour and ague. Upon the next day hee writt meea noate ashoare per a black that [being] formerly acquaintance and seeing mee tobe a new beginer to house keeping, hee had sent mee a sow pigg and 3 Muscovalducks. Mr Sheares comeing here since told mee the ducks belonged to your Hon.our, and that Captain Clarke heard Hudson say they were sent you from Barbado's,which has ever since been a trouble to mee that hee should give mee your present,although att first I designed to present them to you, but when Mr Sheares told meethe ducks was your honours I was resolved to know the truth of itt and spake withCaptain Clarke before I sent them. I hope you will not any wayes take this amissof mee, for 1 protest had there been the least word of sending them to you as apresent from Barbado's spoken to mee, Twould not have kept them 12 houres. Ihave per bearer sent the 3 ducks and a douzen of good fowles with them, which Ihope you will please to except of, and hope your honour will harbour noe ill thoughtof mee for that action, haveing writt the whole truth of ill, and as for the selling ofslaves itt was more then could doe for I have not bought any since I came here. Ittstrue a boy that I had before 1came to Cabo Corsoe, att my first comeing here bad stolen several( things from mee and haveing whipt him, [he] run away from meefor two dayes, and rashly and foolishly l sent him aboard ship and sold him for rum,which I have often since repented, and hope your Honours pardon, haveing writtyou the whole truth to every passage, but suppose the informer might make anaddition to them. I doe not expect to doe the least thing that hold can be taken of,but itt will be immediatly carryed to your Honour, for I am much envyed bycomeing here, but not by the Blacks but whites. Mr Thelwall taxes mee much withinforming your honour against him, and that particularly I writt that hee had cursedyou and spoken verry ill words of you; I begg your Honour to favoure mee soe farrwith a line or two for to cleare mee of itt, for without hee will not be satisfied. Ifshould wrighte any such thing I should be a verry greate rogue, for I never heardhim say ill of you. His man Francis [i.e. Nixon?) justifies itt, and sayes hee had ittfrom credible people att Cabo Corsoe. l have delivered in my last months accompt, 