VI WINNEBA Winneba ('Wyamba', 'Wimba'), in the state of Angona ('Anguyna '), east of Fante,was always primarily important as a source of slaves, rather than gold. The RAChad had a factory here in the m.id-l670s,1 but this had been destroyed in an attackby local people in 1679.2 It appea rs from the Anomabu correspo ndence (no. 21 I)that there was still (or again) a white man and some goods there in April 1681,though it was hoped to get them away.3 In May 1681 an RAC ship traded atWinneba, and received proposals for the settlement of a factory there (nos 584,585). The four letters preserved here relate to an attempt to re-establish the factory,in August 1681. Unfortunately, this coincided with an attack on Angona by Akron('Acc rong'), its western neighbour, which provoked a flight of the inhabitants fromWinncba. Presumably, the attempt was then abandoned. In March 1682, anotherRAC vessel tried to trade at Winneba, but this coincided with a further attack fromAkron, which again dispersed the Winneba people (no.506). 385. Hugh Sheares Wyamba, 15Aug. 1681 This is to give an account of our proceedings. Satureday being the 13, at 10 of theclock wee came to Wyamba and went to the towne and found noe person in it, forthey were run to Sanya but 15 miles distance from Wyamba,4 soe wee went by land and there found James Mills and the Wyamba people, and wee stayed there all Sonday, and Monday morning departed and came to Wyamba with part of theWyamba men, and the next day they are alI intended to come to Wyamba. The causeof their runing away was the reason that the Anguinnas had kild and taken of Momford people 183 and they are affraid of the Accrongs. 5 I would not have your worshipp send any goods till I heare further, for to morrow I will send a man to Accrong and another to both Anguinnas, 6 and if they have done their paJlavora I shall acquaint your worshipp with itt. As for expence here will be some hereafter, for havcing noe time I cannot acquaint better, and by relation of the Wyamba Cabasheers Mr Nightingalle had the Angui nna Cabashers and the Accrong and the Lague Cabashecrs here at Wyamba, and gave them dasheys and spent largly on them and made the said Cabasheers all take their fittish to be true and trusty to thee Royall Affr ican Company of England and their concerns before hee brought any goods ashoare or settled the factory.7 As concerning the house itt is in a bad condi.tion, for there is noe doores nor windows in it, but Gallansa and John Grandy will make itt serve till there be a better made. 386. Hugh Shears Wyamba, 18 Aug. 1681 This is to give your worshipp an accou nt [that] this morning abou t 3 of the clock came here Captain Phipps and Mr Wendover and Mr Nightinga le and James Mi lls and Nicholas Battrell but came not on shoare. 8 I spake with them but they went straite for Accra. This day is come Atta Barba 9 from Anguinna and hee tells mee that within 3 or 4 dayes to tl1emost all will be well, and that the Accrongs will give them pawnes and they likewise to the Accrongs for to be true one to the other. As for the man sent for Accrong I heare nothing of him as yett but expect him every houre. As for the townes people there is none but Gallansa and his people and some of John Grandy's, soe havcing nothing to trouble your worshipp but by the next conveniency you shall heare better. 387. Hugh Shears Wyamba, 22 Aug. 1681 This is to trouble your worshipp [that) as for the man that I sent to Accrong he came Satureday last and give mee an account that the Accrong Cabasheers will come to Momfort to meet the Wyamba and Anguinna Cabasheers any day that they will appoint, and take their finish together and give pawnes, which I will see and gett them into my hand and send them to your wors hipp, but doc what I can I can not get them to come to make their pallavora till their fittish tell them, as they say or fancy as I suppose, but will hasten them all as possible may. This morning came into this road an interloper. 388. Hugh Sheares Wyamba, 28 Aug. 1681 This is to give your worshipp an account of Wyamba people that they would notlike to come together, for the Accrongs give them onely faire words and promisethem pawnes for nothing but for them to come together, and then doc by them asthe Anguinnas did by the Momford people. Thursday last the Queens 10 people werehere and brought some slaves for powder and lead, and other people with someslaves but all woemen for powder likewise, and money for other goods. Soe theytold mee the Queen would have mee goe and live to Sanya and write to yourworshipp for goods , and there should be as good a trade as if wee were here till thetrouble be over. I told them that I could not goe, for my orders was for Wyamba,and told them that your worshipp would be angry with mee and punish mee forgoeing there without your knowledge. They told mee that ifl came to damage yourworshipp would be angry with them, and they should gett noe whiteman to livewith them againe, and told mee that I must goe, and soe they went away for Sanyaand there ordred canoemen to come this day to carry my things by waller and bringmee by land, which I expect every moment, and soe I hope your worshipp will notbe angry with mee, but as for the place if you please to send goods itt is more secure,for the people that belong to itt now can defend againe ten thousand that shalloppose them, for ill is naterally strong, and but two waies to come to the towne andbut two a breast alt most and three or four gates each way before you gett in, soe Ihope your worshipp will send goods to Sanya. Your two hand canoe came hereFryday about 3 of the clock but itt was broke. I bcleeve they gott to Accra this lastnight about midnight. [PS] Just now people are come for mee. I would have sent your worshipp a canoethis night from Sanya but mett with this oppertunity. 