VII JAMESFORT,ACCRA James Fort, Accra, was the easternmost of the RAC's Gold Coast establishments; a factory here had been established by 1674, and was raised to the status of a fort in J 679. 1 There was also a Dutch fort (Fort Crevecour) and a Danish fort (Chris.tiansborg) in Accra. The latter had fallen into Portuguese hands in I680;2 however, as is reported in this correspondence (no.448), the Portuguese abandoned the fort to the Danes again in 1683. Accra was important for trade in both gold and slaves. Accra had been conquered by the hinterland power of Akwam u (' Quomboe', 'Comboe' in these docume nts) in 1680.3 The king of A.kwamu, Ansa Sasraku ('Ahenesa', 'Ahenesah') figures prominently in these letters. Early in I 68 1, there were apprehensions that Ansa might launch a further attack on Accra, including the European forts there (nos 405-6). But in the end, the English fort negotiated an agreement with him (no.409). The Accra correspo ndence provides important infor.mation on Ansa's continuing conquests thereafter, including a war against Akyem ('Achim', 'Akim') early in 1682 (nos 423, 425); the conquest of Tafo ('Taffo') in the interior in 1682 (no.425); a victory against Kwaman ('Co ma' . 'Co mmong ') in 1682 (nos 431, 435); and campaigns against the Adangme ('AJlampo'), east of Accra, in both 1682 (no.431) and 1683 (nos 45 1-2). The hinterland merchants who had previously traded to Accra are named as the Akani ('Arcanies') and the Akyems ('Ackims') (nos 425, 458). However, it is made clear in this correspondence that the Akwamu conquest had had the effect of cutting off these hinterland traders from free access to the coast, King Ansa seeking to interpose himself as a monopolizing middleman , to the great detriment of the trade. James Fort, Accra, 27 Jan. 1680/1389. Arthur Wendover Understanding that your Honour hath brought over sundrey neccesarys, fitting and useful for the factory , vid: as beef, porke , pease, flower, beere, etc. I desire that ifyour Honour would dispose of any of them that I may have a shea re with otheres.I had before this advised your Honour of my wants in this particular, but it hathpleased God to visit me with this cuntry distemper, which is lingring, soe I hopeyour Honours goodness will parden a man just risen as it were from the grave.Ju is very needfull that I should give you to understand the greate neccessitythat there is of the goods following, whic h hath often been sent for, but never coldreceive any, nor noe or satisfaction or ahnswer of late to what I have write.The goods most wanted att present are vid.course sletias a many as cann bee spa redsheets if any to bee had but good allijars ditto long cloths 3, 4, or 5 bails and more [PS] 2 punctions 4 of beef with the pease[?]I of pork 1caske of flower and I of beer with the pried[?]an anker of vinegar 1caske of palme oyle 390. Arthur Wendover James Fort, Accra , 10 Feb. 1680/ l Your Honours of primo February came to my hands on Sunday last the 6 instant,and accord ing to your orders I have made up all my accounts to January the 29 lastpast with the account of all whites men, 1egroes slaves and a\lso negroes freemen,as in the schedule doth appeare. [PS] I hope your Honour hath perused my last as to the want of goods in this factoryof all sorts, but espetially course sletias , which if not supplyed speedyly may provevery prejuditiall. Fine sletias, sheets , allejars, carpetts, blankets, long cloths etc.have been ofteen write for but could not get any answere. [PS]This cannoe I send on purpose will cost 8 oz 8a. 391. Arthur Wendover James Fort, Accra, 20 Feb. 1680/ 1 Both your Honourrs I received from Captain Low, Comander of the Marc hantBoo nadventure, one being dated the 7 and the other the 8, the forme r of which beingan order for the delivering of 33. cask of coureyes [=cowries] and that of the 8 to receive from on board him one hogghead of beef and alsoe one ankor of vinegar, which I had. What booges were remaining in January account last past I deliver'd, which were 5,091 pound as per stilliards, for we were forced to weigh them all, the cask being soe brooken, and alsoe per his request did Jett him have 8 verry good slaves vid: 2 men and 6 woemen as per his reicept , and soe dispatched him Satterday the 12 instant too his great contentment, as I hope he may sattisfy your Honour per his 1st from Arder. In obedience to your order and Counsells I shall bee verry dilligent in appre.hending such persons as are interlooper s and readily send them to Cape Corso per the first oppertunity . And alsoe in my answer to your last per Mr Franckland shall give your Honour the sauisfaction required as to the slaves Captain Robert Norswo rthy carryed away unpaid for in March last [l 6]79/80, which was a most unchristianly action and never will be forgot by the natives of this place, and lickwise the accompt of what goods doth not belong to the Royall Company. Jam es Fort, Accra, 20 Feb. J6801/1392. Arthur Wendove r Your Honours of the 12 from Mr Frances Franckland I received, with whom came one Mr John Wender [as) second, and accordinge too orders [I] did order Mr John Kyte to give him all the assistance possibly, I then being not able of myselfe to performe your Honours commands by reason of an extream vomitting and loseness which had ceised mee that day and continued untill evening, butt notwithstanding nothing was neglec ted and ere this your Honour hath sattisfactio n from Mr Franck.land, with whome came Mr John Kyte according to your orders. The slaves that were taken unpaid and putt on board Captai n John Woodfine per Captain Robert Norsworthy were 12 men, 27 woemen, 4 boyes and 7 girles, alsoe about 17or 18 other pritty chilldr en not looked upon or any notice in the leas t taken of them. These I am certaine of and did enter them, they were 50 persons besides the 17 chilldren , which in all will make 67. Goods not belonging to the Royall Company are 10pieces tapseells 20 piece s nicconees 450 iron barrs Mr Maccabeus Hollis both Mr Edwardd Penn } deceased I thank God I am gott on my legg againe and att present in indifferent good healt'1. 393. Arthur Wendover James Fort, Accra , 14 March 1680/1 Your Honours of the 26 of the last month was per Mr John Kyte, which came safeto my hand, and I retume your Honour many thankes for your good wish of myhealth, which I thank God att present is indifferent. As for them slaves deliveredCaptain Lowe as per his receipt [it] was to help make up his complement, by reasonI had sould I720 lbs weight of booges before your Honours letter came to myhands, as per January accomp t, which were for 33. caske of booges, them 8 slavesamounting to 504 pound s, soe that there are still wanting to compleat your orderes1216 pound, an acco mpt of which he promised to give your Honour per his firstfromArdoe. I have accordinge to your orders made William Pew Sarjant, and NicolasBattrell intends for England per the first opperu nitye. There shall nouthing bewantinge of my endeavours to procure slaves for Captain Bowler.The goods not belonging to the Roya ll Company shall be sold as fast aspossible. Your last was of the 2nd instant per Mr Franckland, from whome I receivedone of the 28 of February being ane order for Mr James Nightingale to reiceive 200bralls and 20 white long cloths to be shippt on board Captain Bowler.And in ansewer to them I have sent to him at Wyam ba 20 wh ite long clothsand lick wise what bralls were remaining , which were I 205 as my February accomptwill manifest, which your Honour will rceceive from the bearer Richard Griffith,the Company appre ntice, with whome comes one Anthony Meadows [a] maison , arefractory person who threatens that upon a misdemeanor tis but runing to thePortugueze forte. Here are some otheres, but for them I shall not trouble yourHonour with untill the time comes that I shall have the happiness of kissing yourhand, which shall not be long. I have marked your prices of provisions and desier that I shall have a supplyof them accor ding to my noat of perticulars. [PS] By February accompt your Honour will find thee great want that here are ofgoods, for what were vendable are all gone, as course sletias, bralls, Ginny cloutsand alsoe long cloths, soe that what rema ines will not maintaine the factory with.out a supply, for the whole dependance that we have relyes uppon iron andtappseels, which sell but sloly. If there be any goods that can be spared for God sakeJett us have them, as sayes, perpetuanoes blews [and) green s, bralls , carpetts,blanketts, pewter baisons , allijars, sletias course or fine, sheets, or any sorts ofJinnens, as long cloths good ones. 394. Arthur Wendover James Fort, Accra, 29 March 1681 Your Honours of the 5th instant I have received, and understand I made noe men.tion, in mine of the 20 of February as concerning the powder belonging to Agent Bradley, which is 11 barrells and one halfe , but of the other tonn which my account per Mr Frankland makes mention of I doe not know to whome they belong, but I suppose they are the Companys and ought soe to be charged. I have alsoe received one of the 19 instant with one for Mr James Nightingale, who is at Alam pa, wherein your honour orders what gold is remaining in my hands, to be sent home per Captain Bowler to bee consigned to the Companys factors Edwin Steed and Stephen Gascoyne Esquires at Barbadoes, 6 which shall be done, but then the people must remaine unpaid for a considerable time, by reason of the great want wee have of goods, the whole dependenace being only in tapsee ls and iron barrs, which are very dull comoditys in this place. As for your canoe that came with Mr Wender, it was as cheape as possible I can gitt one here, but he told me that he would be at the charge himself; and alsoe the medecines for the forts use cost (bona fides) 5 ounces on board Captain Bell , and bad I not had them I myself or others might have perrished, but I have cha rged but 3 oz and there is enough for two 12 months. Mr Kyte was gone from hence before your last came to my hands, with the New England man, Captain Bowler refusing to carry him unless he would deposite 6 pees, which he was not able to doe.7 This canoe which is the bearer one[ = on] Saterday last came from Alampa, per order of Mr James Nightingale, with 5 peice s of sayes and 24 blew pottkeys, they being for GaJlanca at Wyamba.8 Coming ashore at the Dutch landing per the Accra people [they] were all paniard, but upon what accou nt wee know not. Wee sent to them to know the reason, a base daring answer was returned, that we should provide ourselves with watter and doe our worst. Imediatly wee sent two shott into the towne, and left of firing, it being night; all Sunday wee fought them, and killed one man and wounded some others, and likewise part of Monday, the Quamboo people being very helpful, for as God would have it they ware downe, but at last wee forced them to bring in all to our great contentment. The time we were ingaged, wee ware forced to send the 5 hand canoe to the Portuguize for watter, for want of that necessary in this factory by reason our tank is not finished, the want of which wee desire may be seriously considered of, for these base rascalls will alwayes be doing one mischeife or other, they knowing the want wee have of watter, our dayly send 8 miles for every drop wee drink; also [ we need) some shott and match. 395. Arthur Wendover to James Nightingale James Fort. Accra, 25 April 1681 Yours at 4 this morning came safe, your boye from Wyamba is heere with a letter for you, who hath informed me of the loss of the 15 hand canoe, 3 white men and what other lost I cannot tell as yett.9 Heere are noe slaves, but what you left are still rema ining. 396. James Nightingale James Fort, Accra, 25 May 1681 Your Honours and Councells much estemed dated the 25th instant came safe to myhands, wherein I perceevc your Honour and Councells order to take in my posses.sion the fort and merchandise .and all other goods belonging to Mr Wendover orany parson else into my charge. Where upon imediately comeing from on bord Captain Bowler after haveingdispatched him , [I] called up every man, to be understood both Blacks and whits,belonging to the Royal Africa n Company of England and read before [them) yourHonour and Councells order. They all tould mee they would observe it and theyacknowledged mee to be their Cheif tell further order from your Honou r andCouncell, where upon wee hysed up the flagge, !iered 5 guns and drank yourHono ur and Councells good health. Your Honour and Councell will find per this inclosed invoice what goods arein the Castle belonging to the Royall African Company and other persons, but I doeashurc your Honour and Councell that I cannot find out those perticular to whometh[e]y belong, I have examined every person in the fort. I give your Honour and Counccll most humble and hearty thanks that you havebine pleased to intrust me with this charge. Your Honour and Council may restassured that neither Dutch, Portugues or Blacks shall take any advantage of us, Iwill give noe afront nor take any, and as for the trade will doc my uytmoost indeavorfor the pro!itt and creditl of your Honour and CounselI.The Docter Samuell Stone shall have command according your Honours orderboth for lodg ing and dyell. Just now the Blacks hearing I was hear came with some gould for our goods.I ordered Mr Frankland to take itt to avoid all suspition. By the blessing of GodAlmigh ty I hope toe procure a trade here again. Ahenessa sent to me this day and desired a good correspo ndence. His peoplebe about 50 in number. They also tould mee the Dutch Copeman Van der Lypfe 10 hinder them from comeing to our fort for trading, not onely that, but orders hisBlacks being a great number to stale our hodges[= hogs), sheep or what they canlay their hands upon. Nay he is soc convident that he rights to Mr Sheers at Alam po that some white men of our fort, nay the Copeman himself shall suffer the death of a certain person which was killed. I have his own letter. My small opinion is that you right to his master the Gennerall of the Minna of his unhandsorne action , to prevent for the future. [PS] I also send your honour an account signed by Mr Holling s and my selfe of the goods wee had from Cape Cors. In the remains you will find wanting 2 pieces of sayes, 4 perpetiaens, 25 pieces tapseels and 45 pottkeys, which aforesaid goods has since the aforesaid account was signed, since I bought slaves at Wimba, deduktes 3 month s canky mony for 7 canoe men [and] my owne dyctt, as I shall give your Honour an account per the next. I had a great deal of trouble with .Bowler. Pray take it not unkindly that I doe it not now. [PS] Here being noe brandy in the Castle, desire your Honour to send a hogshead. Whatt wee had here was put on bord of Captain Bowler according order. 397. Francis Franckland James Fort, Accra, 25 May 1681 Yours under 12 instant I have received and am sorry that you should beleeve I should be concern'd with Mr Wendover in acting anything contrary to the interest of our masters the Royall Affrican Company. What I know touching Mr Wendover is as followeth, and the reason of my not acquainting you with it sooner was the want of an oppertunity and I thought it not worth while to send a canoe on purpose. Mr Wendover did sell unto Captain Mathews 4 woemen slaves for sayes [and) perpetuanoes, and did also buy more for gold, the woemen was the same you take notice of was denied Captain Bowler and I must doe Mr Wendover the ju stice to say they were not denyed by him but mee (he being at that time very sick) and I will if required take my oath that at that time they were not slaves but pawnes , as was then told to Captain Bowler , and that when Ahenesa sent downe his son to sell them he also sent that Mr Wendover should send them a board the first ship, and if hee refused to take them away and sell them to the Dutch or Portuguese. Captain Mathews being then in the roade , Ahenesas son would have them sent a board before he went. As to Mr Wendovers sending a Jetter to Captain Mathews at Mingo, 11 hee to my knowledge never did, and for helping him to the slaves out of the Portuguese he nor I knew nothing of nor was concern'd in any way with the buying or seJling them. Mr Wendover did further buy out of Captain Mathews 2 great guns for the defence of the fort , because the Accras dayley play the rogue with us, and there being never a gun in the fort that will carry far enough to command them. Hee also bought out of the New England man (whoe was in the roade when wee fought the Accraers and without whose helpe wee could not have got water) some pork and pease. As to what you take notice of concerning the powder that was hiding in thesouldiers roomes when I t0oke an account of the goods att this place, that was noefault of mine, for I went as far as my orders gave me leave and gave an exact accountof what l found, and had any one told mee of them I should have put them in my account with the rest. 398. Francis Franckland James Fort, Accra, 25 May 168L Yours under 19th and 21st instant have received and am sorry for Mr Wendoverssake that soe ill a business should happen. I acquainted the Agent in my letter tohim per Mr Wendove r of what I knew touching the slaves etc., as also the reasonof my not writting of it sooner, which I hope will satisfie him, for I doe assure youit is true and that for the future I will never be guilty of the like, for if noe opportu.nity presents I will send a canoe on purpose. I cannot be so large to you as I would,being much importuned by Mr Nightingale (nay commanded) to goe aboard aninterloper now in the roade, aboard whom he hath bought severall things, as a watch, wine, bearc etc. of one Mr Harvey and one Mr Edlin. I doe beleeve he hath noe good meaning to mee in being soe earnest to have mee goe a board, whether itt be to informe the Agent of it or to make mee as culpable as himself I know not,but be it how it will I care not, for shall by you give the Agent an acount of it, being the best way to keepe pease and quietness here, and therefore I desire if you thinkconvenient to show the Agent this and hee may act as hee sees cause.I take notice what you writt touching Captain Phipps and Mr Stone (who issafe arrived here) and shall doe what lies in my power to serve the Captain. [PS] Here inclosed I have sent you Mr Nightingales note which hee would havehad mec carry aboard, but with much adoe I excused it by writting a note by hiscommand which you have also inclosed, and I can prove that I was commanded todoe itt by him. I beleeve in a day or twos time I shall trouble you with another bya canoe on purpose, for Mr Harvey is now ashoare by his invitation, though att theDutch fort, and hee hath been with him att the Portuguese fort and commanded meeto stay with him at the Dutch fort and in the mean time would have sent away the canoe had not the canoemen accidentally staid till I come. {inclosure 1] James Nightingale [to Mr Harvey) James Fort , Accra, 25 May 168 lThe bearer hereof is Mr Francis Franckland, the Companies factor. I desire you tobe pleased to send mee some sack ashoare, alsoe a cask of beere, and what you itcost will send payment. [inclosure 2] Francis Franckland to Mr Harvey James Fort, Accra, 26 May 168 1Mr Nightingale desires you to send him by the bearer 12 bottles of sack, 2 ankors of brandy, I halfe houre glass, one barrill of beare, some cavieare, anchoveys, olives, and capers, and oynions, and if you please to come ashoare at the Dutch fort bee will meet you there and be very glad to see you there. The bearer will pay you for the things above mentioned. 399. Francis Franckland James Fort, Accra, 6 June I 68 l Yours under the 31 May past received per Mr Wendover, and take notice what you write as to shewing my letter to the Agent, for which and all other kindnesses I give you many hearty thanks. I received a letter from the Agent per said Mr Wendover and desire you to doe mee the kindness to give my hearty thanks for his kindness and asshure him that for the future I will not be guiltie of the Like misdemeanor and shall be shure to observe his command in all things, and also further acquaint him that I made a further inquiry after what Twrite you in my last touching the bearer hereof Mr Nightingalle, and that I find that hee gave for a watch to Mr Harvey l man slave and to one Turner, a Dutch interloper, a boy for a caske of wine. He also told mee that hee gave for women slaves at Allampo 4 tapsells, 1 sheet, which is good [for] I bendie, I angle and a halfe, for a tapsell is never sold under 6 angles at Allampa, and at the same time the Dutch bought for 5 pease. There was also the other day in the roade one Doegood, an interloper, who sent his mate ashoare to him to know what hee wanted. He treated the mate very civilly and sent the docter off with him to buy a quarter cask of wine, which he did. I should have writ this to the Agent himse lfe had I had another conveyance, but he carrying it himselfe [I) fear'd least he should suspect the truth and not deliver it. Pray give my service to Mr Spurvay, Mr Stapleton Captain Phipps and the rest of the Gentlemen with you and tell Captain Phipps I will write to him per Mr Wendover, and answer his desire. [PS] 1 have sent you by the bearer a boy. He is not so handsome as I could wish he were but is the best I could gett, therefor hope you will accept the will for the deede. 400. Francis Franckland James Fort, Accra, 8 July 1681 Your worshipp and Councell s letter under the 2nd instant received per Mr Pley, and give you my hearty thanks for your kindness in makeing mee chiefe of this place and doe asshure you I will take all the care imaginable to advance the interest of the Royall Company my masters, and doe not question (if can gett goods) but to take as much gold as any factory upon the coast. I take notice of what your worshipp writes touching Mr Pleys being second etc. and shall observe your orders in every particular. I shall also take care to use my endeavour to regaine the affection of the blacks in this place (who I can asshure you are a company of great rogues from whome comes noe trade, and whosoever lives here must keepe them in feare of himself or elce hee must keepe nothing here) but more especially of Ahenesa (from whome all the trade co mes), who I intend to goe see, as soone as Mr Wendover iswell to goe up with mee, whoe hath been extreamly ill of a voiole nt feavour in soemuch that wee looked every day for his death but praised be God he is somethingbetter, when he is in a condition shall observe your order to send him up, Ahenesahaveing sent severaJItimes for he that was made Chiefe, and for Mr Wendover. Hereinclosed I send your worshipp an account of what goods remained in my warehousewhen Mr Wendover was made incapable of his imployment, also what slaves etc.belongs to the fort, with last months account, which you will find to be very small(the Quomboer s not comeing downe), and your worshipp will find by the accountof goods what goods was received from aboard Captain Bowler, also what slavesdelivered said Captain. (I have seen a great many goods come out of shipps but doeasshure your worshipp never see any come out in such a condition, being most ofthem spoyl'd by carelessness.) ln my account I have given the Company creditt forthe goods etc. received from aboard Captain Bramlill (but know noe price of theprovisions) and shall in my next give them creditt for the come received from the15 hand canoe, haveing scarce enough come in the castle to last 4 dayes. Beforeshe came I had sent a 5 hand canoe to Wyamba to fetch come but there was noneto be had. I have according to your order sent what damnified goods is in the warehouse,but for the potkeys they are all sold, and had I more could have sold them. The priceof them I knew not onely as Mr Nightingale told mee that Tshould sell them at anangle per peece, but you will find by my account I have got more for them. WhenMr Wendover is in a condition shall observe your worshipps order about his goods,an account of which you rece ive with the rest. I writt your worshipp about 5 dayessince per a 2 hand canoe on purpose for to acquaint you in what distress wee werein for come, but the canoe was unfortunately cast away. The men saved their livesand got to Wyamba where they got another canoe , but the weather proving very badwas forc't to put in at Momford neare Dague [var. Tague), 12 where they panyard themen and kept them several! dayes, but at last they sent one of them downe to tell mee that except I sent them !Oa I should not have the man againe. I sent the monyby the 5 hand canoe when she went to Wyamba to come and sent for the man butcould hcare nothing of him, he was one of the pawnes of the fort. If any canoecomes from your worshipp they had best have a care of touching there for they willserve them in the same manner. I doe not question but in a few dayes to have someof them in the fort, and if have will make them pay severly. lPS] I have sent per this conveyance 25 long cloths damnified and 2 tapsells. 401. Francis Franckland James Fort, Accra, 9 July 1681 J have received your worshipps under the 4 instant and returne your worshipp my most humble and hearty thanks for your several! kindnesses, but more especially for the last, and doe asshure your worshipp that I will take all care possible to shew you my gratefullness by doeing nothing that may be against the Royall Company interest, that thereby you shall see that what formerly was guiltie ofl am very sorry for, but one thing I humbly beg of your worship (which I am confident your goodness will not denie) that is what reports soever you have of me, that you would be pleased to judge favourablely of me till I can come to justify myselfe, for your worship will perceive by the inclosed note there is one that endeavours to doe mee all the diskindness he can, by faire promises to them that will impeach mee though falsly. I am hearty sorry that I should give your worship the trouble of a second time remembring me of the money I had att Cape Corsoe, but doe asshure your worship I sent per Mr Wendover when be was .last with you, but his trouble s made him forget to give it you. I have sent it per Peter the canoeman, as also a hee and shee goate with a black boy which I would beg of your worship to accept. The boy is the best I can gett at present, when goe up to Ahenesa shall endeavour to gett you another. This fort is very much out of repaire, one flanker being falen in and two more is proped up, and also severall things wanting which is too long to give an account in writting per this conveyance. If I thought your worship would not take it ill I would come up to Cape Corsoe and acquaint your worsh ip in what a condition the place is in per word of mouth, and also acquaint your worship which way it might be made good at a small charge, to last for several! years whereas now it is repairing every day. If your worship think convenient of my comeing up I can come in the canoe with Mr Wendover. [PS] One thing I had almost forgot to acquaint your worship with, that is when Mr NightingaJle was here cheife that he ordered me to give the Docter 2o 2a -ta to goe aboard Doogood to buy wine, which I could not denie. I would not charge itt in the Company account without your worships leave but hope your worship will not let me loose itt, itt not being in my power to withstand his order. [InclosureJ Samuel Stone James Fort, Accra, 10 July 1681 Mr Nightingale did desire mee that I would say that Mr Franck.land was in as much fault as Mr Wendover, and did desire that I would aske and inquire of John Clarke of all the transactions in itt, (he) being an acquaintance of mine formerly, that bee would tell mee and that I should send to him about itt, for bee did not question but hee should be chiefe here and it should be the better for me. I do know nothing of this concerning Mr Franckland with Mr Wendover in the least.13 402. William Pley 14 July 1681 Haveing received a letter per the Dutch canoe from Captain Bram fill from Allampo,and not knowing what importance the contence might be (Mr Franckland being gonup to Comboe to Ahenesa, being sent for by one of his sons), I humbly thought ittmy duty to dispatch a canoe with itt, not doubting of your worships approbatio ntherein. Mr FranckJand hath not yell overhal'd the warehouse since my arrivaUhere , but hath promised to doe ill when hee relumes, however ju st at his departurehee left me the key of the warehouse , which I was forst to take , there being noneelce to doe it, hopeing Mr FranckJand will prove as honest to mee in that respect,as I will be always true and faithfull to my charge, and the Compa ny and yourworships interest. Hee likw ise tells mee he hath noe gold chest (on ly a small trunk),soe that I can have noe key to that corespondent to your worsh ips and Councells order. As Mr Wendover hath for some time past been almos t at the point of deathbut is now much better, yet so extreame weake that Mr Franck land durst not ventureon the considerat ion to send him up to Cape Corsoe as yet. When Capta in Rickard scomes downe here, I will use my utmost endeavour with the boatsway ne, andothers, to heare of Mr Spurvays brandy, and will send an attestation (witnessed)about itt. 403. William Pley James Fort, Accra, 18 July 168 1 Your worships packett to Mr Franckland arrived here yesterday morning by the 2hand canoe, and at his retume from Quo rnboe (which wee hourly expect) shaJI bedelivered him, in whose absence I take the greatest care possible of the fortswell fare, he having three whitemen with him. I wrote your worship Fryday last, towhich I shall refer. 404. William Pley Jame s Fort, Accra, 13 Aug. 1681 Understand ing by a canoe which came to this place from Cape Corsoe the indispo.sition of Mr Franckland , I humbly presume to trouble your worshipp with thisJetter, in whic h I have sent a true list of the goods that were in the ware house whe noverhall'd by Mr Franckland at his departure (fearing through sickness hee mayomitt itt). For the muskets, powder etc. I have as yet noe account of them, neithe rhave I as yet (nor I beleeve I sha ll not) selJ any till Mr Franckland s retume , for tillthen wee shall have noe trade with the Quomboers (on whome almos t our wholetrade depends), of which I suppose your worshipp understands the reason ere this.I should make itt my busines s to be exact carefu ll and honest in the accou nt ex.pected from mee since Mr Franckland s departure , which (the prom ises[?] consid.ered and the great want of vendab le goods) your worshipp can not expect veryconsiderable. However I am resolv'd my care both in that particular [and] the forts weJlfare, and all my other actions shall declare how great my resentment is of the infinit favours your wors hipp hath been pleas'd to heap on me. Wee bave had very sickly season here since Mr Francklands departure, the Docter and most of the men in the fort have been very ill, but I bless God all upon their !eggs againe except one (John Clarke) of whose recovery we dispaire, and hourly expect his death by the flux. The Accraers art the Dutch Towne and the Dutch themselves (w hoe are it seems threatned too) expect Ahenesas comeing upon them , the blacks lying in the Dutch fort,and makeing great tiers in the night. Whether this may be a falce allarme or not wee are ignorant, and though wee are assured from all hands, that Ahenesa hath noe thoughts (but of amity) concerning this fort, yet I humbly hope our utmost care, both in good watching and putting our selves in the best posture of defence we can, will not be amiss. 405. Samuell Stone [James Fort, Accra], 17 Aug. 1681 I presume to send this canoe to acquaint your worshipp that Mr Pley is taken dangerous sick of a feavour and a voiolent vomiting, which I thought to acquaint your worshipp of itt, this being the 3rd day of his sickness . I wou ld desire the Docter might send mee these medicines that I shall write him for by this canoe. I would desire your worshipp might dispatch the canoe with all speede. The reason of my wanting medicines is wee have had all the men in the castle sick with myselfe alsoe, but now praised be God wee are all in pretty good health againe except Mr Pley. This day wee have buried one John Clarke who dyed of a voiole nt feavour. 406. Jame s Nightingale & George Phipps James Fort, Accra, 27 Aug. 168 1 This is to give your honour an account of our arrivall here being the 18th instant , where wee found Mr Pley and most of our whitemen very sick. The first wee undertook e was with all speed to gett the fort in good order. We have mended both our flanker s [and] gott in the fort wood, water and stones. Afte rward being the 21 instant wee send a person to Ahene sa to know his demands against Mr Wendover, and if ditto Ahene sa send his son Boebie or any other per son here to make his pallavora should by us come and goe free back againe, but as yett wee received noe answer. Here is a gener all report by both Dutch and the Govemour of the Por.tugueese that Ahenesa has divided his army in 3 part s and intends in person with his party for our forte, the two other generalls the one for the Dutch the other for the Portuguese. Wee will doe our indeavour if they come, if not will if itt is possible to put by all differance to procure a trade againe, but we doe assure your hono ur itt will not be easi ly done, for this factory has been abominably abuse d by our Com.pany servants, as your honour will assurly find. Your honour will be pleased to send us for the use of the fort one hogshead brand y [and] some beefe, wee have not a dram of brandy in the fort and drink nothing but stinking water. I send your honour the accou nts of remaines found here. Pray send the canoe with all speede backagaine. Our canoemen are all quartered on the foure flankers. 407. James Nighti ngale James Fort, Accra, 27 Aug. I 681 This onely to give you an account as that Mr Wendover demands from Ahenesa 9m7o Sa, soc that I beleeve his beloved girl will balance the accounts,1~ for I heareAhenesa demand s 40 bendys. This factory has been abomin ably abused, and fur.ther I can assure your honour ill will be not a little trouble to resettle it againe.Ahenesa is our enemy on the one side and the Accra peop le on the other. Yourhonour will find likewise per the account of remaines that Mr Franckland has solda great deale of goods, with what hee received of Capta in Bramfill, but here is noegold in cash only 2 or 3 ounces. Mr Wendover demands from Ahenesa, March 16 1679/80 m 0 aI 00 muskctts15 2 47. barrellspowderatt 4 ouncesp. 3 640 musketts moreto sundry accountsof Mr Wendover 2 2to Dabo 3 4Comesin all 9 7 4 l will doe my endeavour to reconcile diffcrance , to be understood as far as itt is for the profitt and creditt of our masters the Royall Company. Wee doe expec t newsfrom Ahenesa every houre. When Tknow his demands and wee come to a pallavora,shall per the 2 hand canoe give your honour an account. I am very lame and one of my feet allrnost spoyl'd with thee joumy to Barracoe. 16 Your honour be pleased toassist us what you can, for ther is here nothing to be gott, onely stinking durty water.Wee all expect Ahenesa with his armye every houre but wee keepe a good watchwith our whitmen, slaves and canoeme n. 408. William Pley James Fort, Accra, 8 Sept. 1681 I bless God I have overcome a desperate and dangerous feavour (under which I hava long time linguished) soc far as I am againc uppon my !eggs, though soe weakcI am scarce able to stand. Though MrFrankland is dead yet must needs complaine of a very grosse abuse he has put on mee in two or three particulars of the invoice of goods he gave mee at his departure, for haveing several! times desireing him to overha ll the warehouse hee still put mee off till the very instant of his departure to Capo Corsoe, and then he went into the warehouse with a penn and ink, and in an hurry, would not suffer mee to overhall all the goods, especially the pottkeys, but made mee sett them downe as hee dictated, and hee being my supperiour I could not helpp itt, but hee protested the truth of itt. I confess I was much dissatisfied, but was induct to beleeve him , not knowing his actions then as I have heard since, for which I am sorry. I feared the pottkeys at first, because hee made and gave soe many of them away, soe that upon the tale of them since I find 24 less then hee assured mee there was. That this is true l call the God of truth to witness and l hope your Worshipp will beleeve mee, for in the presence of God I wish I may forfeit my eternall happyness if any goods hath gone out of the warehouse more than my enclosed account makes out since Mr FrankJands departure. I must confess the thoughts of being so overcatcht by one 1thought my friend, was a great trouble to mee in my sickness, but God that knowes the secreets of my soule knows my inocence too, and I hope your worshipp will not suffer mee to come to any damage where I am guiltless, through the unequal! dealings of my superiour, since I never yett did wrong to any man, but will still make itt my great endeavour to answer your worsh ipps goodness to mee, in my dil1igence and fidellity as long as I live. Another mistake he made was, hee gave me an account but of IO Guynie clouts, when (under other goods) there was 82. And in his account 19 paper brawles, when there was but 7.. This is the errors and God knows (and others here) occationed by Mr Frankland, the rest is right, onlely divers goods cutt by him for cloaths etc. Besides of the 39 peeces of tapsele 3 (that were on the shelfe, and reckoned to mee) were owned, and prooved, to be due to a black for cows Mr Frankland had bought and delivered per order since Mr Night.ingalls arriva l). I was sent hither by your worshipp in a time of very intricate and clandestine dealeing s (as appears since), though I was kept ignorant, and I thank God inocent of all, but I hope for the future wee shall have noe more such base transactions here, which wee'll use all imaginable care to prevent. Enclosed is my account since Mr Frankland departure, and MJ Nightigalls receipt for the money what goods were sold while Mr Frankland was there. I constantly gave him the money, as I received itt, and hee tooke an account of the goods delivered (as I suppose Mr Wendover can informe your worshpp) and told mee hee would make itt up in his account. If hee hath not done it and your worshipp require itt I can doe it out of my booke. Two slaves bought by Mr Frankland hath died in his absence. I most humbly begg your worshipps pardone for my tediousness and bad writting, which is occasioned by my sickness, and doe most humbly and heartyly thank your worshipp for your great goodness to mee. [PS] I doe assure your honour all this above I have heard reported by several! to betrue. James Nightingale 409. James Nightingale James Fort, Accra, undated [Sept. 1681] Your Honours much esteemed dated the 25th August and the other the 3 I st dittohave received , wherei n I was very sorry to heare the death of my friend MrFrankJand, and since your Honour and Councill have been pleased to make meeChiefe of this fort, wherefore [ give your Honour and Councill most humble andhearty thanks , worthy Gentlemen you may rest assured that l shall doe the utmostof my endeavour to procure a trade againe, but itt can not be done without troubleand some small charges, wherein I will be as spaireing as possible I can, and as formy accounts your Honour will find them at all times to agree with the warehouse,for I doe not intend to trust the blacks nor run out the Company's goods or tradewith interlopers. Captain George Phipps and I have according to order sold Mr Frank.landsgoods at publique outcry, as per account will appeare, wee have found noe moneythen 5a in gold in his chest or elcewhere. What provisions out of Captain BramfildI found here, according the account shall give the Company creditt. Docter StoneI have displac 't according to order and have paid him 4 months pay at 9a I ta permonth Mr Wendover hath with mee and Captain Phipps overhall 'd the warehouse twotimes, wherein wee found no more goods as have given your Honour account the27th August last, onJy 60 iron barrs more belonging to Mr FrankJand, whereof 10is paid for the debts he owes as per ballance of account will appeare. Mr Wendoverwill give your Honour an account of all actions and transactions, alsoe the accountof the wanting of goods which comes to M 12.5 gold, besides provisions. In answer of 31 August: Wee were informed Ahenesa would be downe with uswith 3 armies, but wee hope it is but a lying report, however if it be or not wee areprovided for them as much as possible wee can. I have received 59 gallons ofbrandy and shall give the Company creditt.Mr Wendover hath had all the freedome imaginable to make up his pallavorawith Ahenesa, as will appeare. I send your Honour an inventory of Mr Frankiands goods, which [we] foundhere, the account at what rates they were sold att, the account of paying the garrison2 months pay beginning the 22nd July and ending the 16 September, an inventoryof Mr Wendovers goods and chattles, and the pallavora with Ahenesa of our pro.ceedi ngs. Goods wanting here: sheets, brawles, carpetts, and blanketts of all sorts, per.pettuanes, tapsells, allejars, ginghams, pewter jug gs, longees, red ground pio.tadoes, yallow beads, brandy, some bright musketts and good powder, for almost here is much damnified, fine and course sletias, cowryes, and longcloath. Pray let Captain Phipps send mee my goods in the 5 hand canoe, for I want them. My desire is that your Honour and Councill will be pleased to send mee the rates and prizes of the disposall of the Company's goods in this place, that soe I may follow order, also if I shall give the Company creditt for the goods found here per remaynes in my booke or any other persons, the quantity and quallity, for the account is strangely to mee, therefore expect order. Your honour will be pleased to send a booke to keep my accounts in, some wax and paper. I desire your Honour to be pleased to Jett mee have for a time James Mills, I being not able to come downe staires for lameness in my foot, and Mr Pley not yet well, have noe body to looke after the Companys concemes. Pray do not faile to give Ahenesa a gift, to be understood firelocks and spirrits, alsoe send some good powder and bright musketts. Ahenesa desires the same, in soe doeing wee may procure a traid and to hinder our neighbours. Now is the time according to my small oppinion. At the months end shall give my accounts, soe haveing noe more att present onely referr the remainder to Captain Phipps. [PS] Mr Wendover nor Mr Frankland has paid Ahenesa monthly this lO months. [inclosure] Nota August 21st 1681 Wee sent up to Ahenesa Ba: Conton a black with these following orders: 1st to desire Ahenesa to send his sonn Bobie or any other to know his demands against Mr Wendover as soone as possible hee could. 2ndly That whome Ahenesa should send to our fort should goe free back againe. 28th ditto Ahenesa sent to us 3 of his men with a message that the person wee sent to him the 21st was there safely arrived, but would not send his sonn Bobie or any other person to make a pallavora with us before wee tooke our oath upon the Bible and James Mills [took his oath on] their fittish that whome Ahenesa should send, should by us goe free back againe, where uppon Captain George Phipps and I tooke our oath upon the Bible, and James Mills their fettish, as aforesaid, all to regaine the creditt of the Royall Affrican Company, which is aborninabley abused, and to procure a trade againe if itt be possible. The 3 persons Ahenesa sent down to us tould us he designed noe harme against us, onely demanded his owne, of which at present wee are unsensible, and besides bid us beware of the Dutch, for they were all rogues and lyers. September the 2nd Ahenesas sonn Bobie came hither and made his palavora with us to say as fol.loweth: That Ahenesa hath noe demands against Mr Wendover for lying with Boque hiswife, neither did hee take any great notice of itt when wee tould his soon Bobie ofitt, onely ditto Bobie tould us his father Ahenesa demanded his due to him one[=on] his monthly saJlery, and that the Company , Mr Wendover or any in the Com.pany service should [n]ever be troubled in the least about his wife Boque. 17 To allthis Ahenesas sonn Bob ie tooke the fetish, and that hee would bring downe a trade,and wee to procure the same tooke the fetish that Ahenesas son or any hee sent to our fort should by us have and receive all civilllity whatsoever. September the 3rd Ahenesas sonn Bobie went away, with whome wee sent the aforesaid Black namedBa: Como with our orders to give Ahe nesa an account of our proceedings and whatfetish his soon Bobie hath taken in his behalfc , and that also wee desired dittoAhenesa to con.firm the same. September the 9th The aforesaid Ba: Conto returned from Ahenesa with 3 of his men whome sent usworde hee had not the least pretention either against Mr Wendover or any in thisfort, and that hee approved of the fetish his soon Bobie had taken in his behalfe andpromised allwaycs to confinn the same, and that hee had not nor never would havethe least quarrel I against the English here, and whatever stories wee heard from theDutch, blacks or any other wee should not beleivc them. Hee did assure us that ifwee would procur e him good bright musketts, powder and other goods, wee shouldnot want either for slaves, or gold, but wee should have a constant trade. All theseaforesaid is the certaine truth to us related in James fort att Accra the 9th Septemberin Guiney 1681. James Nightingale George Phipps William Pley 410. James Nightingale James Fort, Accra, 10 Sept. 1681 I cannot but give your honour most humble and hearty thank s for all your kindnessto mee. I desire your honour will be pleas'd to continue in the same practice, andon my side there shall be nothing wanting to answer your honours expectat ions, and shall at all times follow your commands. 1 send your honour a note which oneMr Beacon hath given Mr Frankland for 4 elephants teeth which ditto Franklandsent home upon his own account, also two kind letters your honour was pleas'd towrite to him. I could heartyly wish, I had such a holesome advice given to mee, I doe assure your honour I should be glad to except itt, and at all times to follow the same. There comes likewise per this convert a coppie of an attestation of Docter Stone to the contrary of his former in the behalfe of Mr Francis Frankland to the contrary of mee, 18 as Docter Hulett was pleased to write Mr Frankland of, and also to inspect my actions, but the good God above has been pleased by his great mercy to lett the truth be known [as to] whoe are the persons that dealt with interlopers. [inclosure] Note Mr Frankland and the Portuguese Govemour Julian Campo de Barreto bought in company out of an interloper named the Blessing, Mr Edlin and Mr Harvey [com .manding], about 200 iron barrs, whereof 60 found here since my last belonging to ditto Frankland. Besides I doe not reckon the muskets which ditto Frankland brought ashoare in Mr Wendovers time, and there is also repotted that here is more goods at the Portuguese fort: to whome they belong I doe not know. I am very well satisfied that Mr Arthur Wendover bought some time agoe out of a Dutch ship some sayes, perpettuanoes, fine sletias and other goods, whereof at present is in the Portuguese forte 46 fine sletias, 5 sayes, and 7 perpetuanoes in the hands of Julian Campo de Baretto, which aforesaid goods your honour will be pleased to demand of MrWendover as belonging to Mr Frankla nd, and lett him give his note for the delivering of the same to ditto Julian Campo Barreto, that I may demand the same, alsoe give mee your order for whose account I shall dispose of them. Your honour will be pleased not to Jett Mr Wendover know that I have any intelligence of what hee has done, for hee intends to keepe mee ignorant. Captain Phypps will give your honour an account of all my actions and trans.actions, alsoe the proceedings here. 411. William Pley James Fort, Accra, 28 Sept. 1681 According to that inviolable duty I am ever bound to beare you for your great and repeated favours to mee, I humbly presume to acquaint your worshipp with the transactions here, for the blacks, both Ahenesa's people and of the Dutch and Portuguese Towne and of other countries, came this morning in a kind of a muti.nous manner, upon the reporte Bonete the black that came downe from Capo Corsoe gave them, that Mr Nightingale was to depart this place and Mr Hassell to come Chiefe. The Capisheers in general! declared upon their fetish that they would sooner die every man than admitt Mr Hassell to come on shoare, but would with their musketts with their whole force resist him to the utmost, and that if be did come on shoare, the fort should be forever in danger of treachery and never 1 oz[?] of trade should be admitted, for they all declared they loved Mr Nightingalle and would venture their lives for him and bring him a good trade, but as for Mr Hassellthey had not forgott their wives, children and friends that was carried away in histime, and that hee should never have one months peace here. I doe assure yourworshipp from the bottom of my heart I doe not write this out of any feare from, orpersuasions of Mr Nightinga lle but purely out of duty and commands your wor.shipp hath been pleased to give mee to infonn you of all transactions of moment,and leave itt to your worshipps pleasure, not doubting but you will please to confidein my fidellity both in tllis and my former letter (being not without sufficientwitness in both), for I thank God I never did, and will imbrace the maxirne thathonesty is the best pollicy, and doubt not after your worshpp hath been pleased toputt mee right in the abuses put upon me per Mr Frankland as to the pottkeys etc.you shall find your favours not plac t amiss, paying humble thanks I ought, for hereJlive here without expence in the least at the chiefs table, which most heartyly fromthe bottom of my soule thank your worshipp for, since I could not doe itt att CapoCorsoe. And I most earnestly (on that consideration) begg your worshipp to con.tinue mee here, and if I in the least doe amiss either to the Royall Company or yourworshipp Jdoe not desire the least favour as unworthy of soe much goodness.I doe not put the Company to the charge of this canoe, for the Cabosheers sendit with one of them in it to make a pallavre with your worshipp concerning thepromises. I begg your worshipp not to take this amiss, being done out of pure duty(being their very words), and not for any other end. As soone as I receive anyquarters sallary I wilJ returne your worshipp the 17a l am indebted to the Steward.I begg pardone for my bad writting, the canoe being just goeing. 412. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 7 Oct. J681 These may serve your Honour for advise onely. I am l praise God in safety (thoughwith difficulty) arrived here ashoare, for which I onely give God the glory, andhumble thankes to your Honour. l write onely now per via advise that the peoplewhich your Honour did detayne yesterday arrived here with your Honours letter,which I thinke you did beyond expressio n most discreetly, and God aJone be youradviser and councellour still to act good as you have in that onely thing to myselfe.The narrative shall be more ample for the future [PS) Pray excuse brevity at present but after Captain Rickards departure shallinlarge. I have given Mr Nightingale a receipt for all things here that found.Idem ad eternum. 19 413. William P ley James Fort, Accra, 7 Oct. 1681 Mr Hassell arrived here the 5th instant, and had opposition by the Blacks at his landing, having sma ll shott discharged at him, but is now safe on shoare. I am now sensible there was treachery used by those that ought to have done otherwise in that respect. Mr Wendover brought the sad news of my fathers death, who was my onely friend (my mother being dead before), and therefore I hope God, who is the father of the fatherless, will be pleased to heare my prayers soe farr asto recompence to you all your kindness to me in my sad condition, and I hope I shall never be unwort hy of it. I have been much aflicted with a relapse of my feavour since my last to your Worship but now I hope all is over. [PS] By reason of my great sickness under which I lay and am yett troubled with, I had never the key of, nor did deliver any th ing out of the warehouse, but James Mills in his time [did so?]. Mr Nighti ngale on a word or two would not signe it. Please to peruse the inclosed etc. Now all things are right and I have noates for all delivered and feare noe mistake etc. [Inclosure] I doe acknowledge William Pley by reason of his sickness, had nothing to doe in, nor did deliver any goods out of the Royall Company warehouse at Accra from the day of my landing there being the 18th of August 1681 till the time Mr Ralph Hassell had charge of the sa me , being the 5th day of October followi ng. Wittness my hand. I doe acknowledge that Mr James Nightingale did confess that what is above written is true, but refused to signe it as he promised etc. Ralph Hassell Arthu r Wendover 414. Ralp h Hassell [James Fort , Accra], 11 Oct. 1681 May it please your Honom that since the above have received the remaines of Captain Rickards cargoe and an account thereof have inclosed, with an accoun t of all the goods in and about the forte, but cannot be certify'ed to whom they in part properly belong to, for noe one can give me a perfect accompt thereof. As for the things your Honour ordred in your orders that were at the Portugueese forte, [I] can learne nothing of neither will any one give me insight therein. I have likew ise sent three receipts for 4 woemen slaves, which was all Captain Rickard would receive. I question not but Mr Nightingale will exclayme against mee , whic h I hope and humbley begg your favour to deale soe candidly by mee as to advise mee, and then shall give with Mr Pley a certayne relation of all occurrencys that hath hapned per Mr Wendover, who will follow to moITow night. [lnclosure l) Accra October the 10th 1681Received then on board the shipp Blessing, from Mr Ralph Hassell 4 Negroewoemen slaves, which are for accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England Samuell Rickard [Inclosure 2] Account of goods received from on board the Blessing, Capta in Samuell Rickard Commander , for account of the Royall Affrican Company of England -vizt216 rnusquetts matchlocksI00 narrow blew baftas 20 sayes, some ratt eaten 17 perpettuanes 12 broad niccanees 17 barrell s powder 8 narrow n.iccanees 8 damaged Welch plaine s10 pewter juggs 20 tankards 8 sletias, much soyld 26 halfe firkin s of tallow 20 old sheets 1 box of beads, quantity contcnce 147 lbThe afore goods are received , wittness our hands th.is 11th October 1681 Ralph Hassell William Pley [Inclosure 3] Inventory of goods in the Royall Affrican Cornpanys warehouse of James Forte atAccra the 6th of October 1681 received from James Nightingale vizt 347. iron barrs24 sayes, and 12fatham [= fathomJ: 3 are quite ratten, and most worm eaten16 perpetruanes33 blew pottkeys6. paper brawles, all damaged9 peeces tapsecles, whereof 7 are all broake and damaged10 peeces niccanees, cutt and broake thee most part24 blew baftas }29 d. hi 53, some damaged1tto w te81 Guiney clouts, old31 peeces of Welch plaines 100 peeces blew long cloathes1 ditto white, rotten6 old sheets 36 six pound pewter basson 4 halfe firkin s of tallow [55 dozen old knives 366 musquetts } 41852 ditto damaged 33 old carbynes J61 lead barrs 32. b:111"ellspowder } 36. 4 dnt o, damaged 34 brass kettles 4 chests come 3 peeces course sletias ditto in cartidges, quantity 25 dozen Provitions received from Captain Bram.fill 56 wormeaten stoclcfish . a small bagg ofoatcmeale l gallon vinegar l. ditto ranke oyle ArtilJery 15 great gunns 2 pattareras 20 with broakcn chambers 27 firelocks, 22 broake I haJben 5 powder homes 60 great shott some small short, part received from Captain Phipps 30 granado shells, small St Geo,ges flag drom Sundryes about tbe forte vizt 5 hand canoe 5. cocam utt trees stacke wood some rope 4 iron crowes 3 pickaxes 2 sawes l axe Companycs pawnes Boquee, wife to Ahenesa, for 100musquens Aggafor Oo 12a Ota } Aquerry for l 08 0 3 canoemen Asha for 0 7 6 I sword for 0 0 Accompt of slaves belonging to the Company3 Ardoc bumboye s21 3 women, their wives23 women slavesman girle Provitions 9 peeces of porkc 8 ham s ditto, dryed. hogshead pease . firkin of ranke butter 3 small potts palme oyle barrell of flower Old tinning 4 old table cloathes 13 old napkines 2 pewter bassons 4 dishes 6 small porring ers 10 plates . chest of suger Plate punch bole silver tankard I ditto porringer3 spoones forke dram cup a small parcelle of earthenware bed Arda cloath cott , lackerd case. quantity 153 quart bottlesl table 6 chaires fowling peece Cattle vizt 2 sheepe 3 lambs 2 boarcs 9 sowes shoates3 suckling piggs16 goates2 3 kidd Wee whose names arc under written doe acknow ledge that all the foregoi ng and above written goods etc. are in James Fort Accra, wiliness our hands this 6th day of October 168 1 Ralph Hassell William Pley 415. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 18 Oct. 1681 These comes per Mr Wendover, who had come up sooner could hee have gott a canoe. These serve onely to advise your Honour of what wee want here and are in great want of, vizt a hogshead of tarres for the tanke and 1000 bricks to lay the bottom of ditto, 3 or 4 good locks, 1 good large lock for the warehou se dore, some large and short irons for slaves, for wee have none here, I bought 3 men and 3 women yeste rday and am afraid of them running away for wont of irons to put them in; and if your Honour can spare some of your elme pipes for to repaire two flankers which are falling, with a mason to repaire them, also some good come, for that we had per Captain Rickard being but 17 chests are all soe bad that the slaves wi IInot eate it nor scarce the hoggs; also some brandy, for I found not a drop in the forte but a little I brought with me, which is aJ!ready expe nded. I thought good to advise your Honour that soe you might not blame me for not giving timely advise, but that crime shalJ not be laid to my charge, for per every oppert unity I will advise of affaires here. James Fort, Accra, 22 Oct. 1681416. William Pley Your Worships kind letter I have received, for which I retume my most hearty thankcs, it being a great cordiall in my trouble for my fathers death, and I shall ever pray for your life, health , and happ iness since my well being here wholly depends on your generosity and goodness, which I hope I shall never misuse. As to Mr Hassells opposition [= opposition to Mr Hassell] at landing, when I writ your Worship, the palavor of the Cabbishe eers (which was the same day), God knowes I know nothin g of any intrigu e, but since tis too apparent twas contr ived by James Mills, doubtless by the command of his the n Master,22 as the confession of some of the Blackes and other circumstances make apparent, but J hope all will prove insignificant and wee shall have a good trade (if Tmay measure the future by thepresent) to our masters profitt. [PS] Desire your Worship not to declare (if possible) my words to Mr Nightingalefor I am very loath in my condition to create myselfe the least enemy, though whatTwrite is soe true that Mr Nightingale did protest he would not admitt Mr Hassellon shoare before he send his orders in a canoe, to what end I leave your Worship tojudge. 417. Ralph Hassell 25 Oct. 1681 Since the above dated I received your honours of the 18th instant, and render yourHonour the choycest of tenn thousand thankes for your cordiall expressions to meand I have donn what in me lyeth to render ample sallisfaction to your honoursdemands, and I will not add fuell to fire, for whome you guess is the whole agitatorand whome your Honour has soe highly advanced, Mr Nightingale per name, didsay to Mr Pley I should not come on shoar till I had sent him my orders, and uponthat gave you r honour for all your civilities many bitter curses, for what reason Iknow not. He would not give me any acccount of every particular mans concernsbut said all are the Companyes, which Mr Wendover can give your Honour amplesattisfaction therein. I question not but he has been the hearauld of his owne actionsand has sufficiently emblazoned his heroick deeds, thinking noe man able to agitateas he hath donn; but my halfe of this month will demonstrate l have past him, for Ihave nigh 12m of gold and 12 slaves, and what goods that are vendable for thepurchasing more which I will here insert. As for t11eworthy gentleman Mr Mills,who did before my arrival] upon somewhat of a word given him per Mr Plcy, waitefor him on purpose to shoote him with 4 bulletts in his peece, and swore if he camedowne would be his death. What J have desired your Honour on the other side I humble begg you willsend, for I cannot buy any more slaves till I have come. I need not mencion whatgoods, but must submitt and say what you please to spare. I have not a good saynor perpettuanoe, nor sheet, sletia, brandy. AJlejars are much in quest for slaves,soe is all goods. This is the needfull at present, with all the paper inke and wax Ihave [sic], soe hope a speedy supply. I humble begg your Honours favour with thecontinuance thereof, and I shall assuredly follow your commands in all thingswithout the least breath. 418. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 31 Oct. 1681 Yours of the 27th instant have before me, and in answer to your command of aformer date have in every poynt hope rendred your Honour ample satisfaction,whic h I hope ere this has arrived you in salvo with Mr Wendover, who would have followed Mr Nighlingale as I in my former advised but noe oppertunity proffered till that he imbraced per vio Anamaboe, and for want of a 2 hand canoe with 2 canoemen severall things may accidentally happen which requiretb speedy advice, soe humbley begg that your Honour will agree for one and send downe at soe much per mensem as you thinke convenient, which will be cheaper then to send up a 5 hand canoe and lhin.kewee are beholden to them for the pay and labourc. The goods wee had that was good is most gone, soe humbley begg a speedy supply, vizt good sayes, and perpettuanoes, sheets, allejars, sletias, broad niccanees and tapseeles, and any goods, for slaves is to be had if I had these goods. As for neccssaryes, come is most wantin g, IO or 12 pipes of cl mes if can be spared to build 3 flankers, which cannot be made use of for want of repairc, a 1000of good well bmrtt bricksfor to Jay the bottom of lhe tank, with a hogshead of tarras and a bricklayer with a kill23 of shells to make lime, for the tower is very leaky. If your Honour please to send these things, the charges elce will be little or nothin g. I have in this 25 dayes taken 12m 3o 8 odd mony, and bought 5 men and 6 woemen, and have tumd severall away for want of allejares and other goods above recited. Jmmediatly on perusall of your Honours last I gott 2 fresh canoemen and sent them to Mr Shears, whose answere I have here inclosed.24 J hope will excuse me of neglect and cleare mee of what was not guilty. [PS] Mr Pley presents his humbl e service 10 your Hono ur. Herc is no brandy nor come, this I humbley offer to your Honour in hopes of a speedy supply, with paper inke and wax. James Fort, Accra, 12 Nov. 168 1419. William Pley Since my last to your Worship noe occurran ces have happened here worth your perusall, as soon as any presents you shall not want the knowledge of them. My accompl of goods sold in the month of October and remain ing the beginni ng of the next month is ready, most of which are damnified, and unfitt for sale, and wee waite your Worships pleasure as to a supply. I most humbley begg your Worship will please to give me some directions, as to the method of my particular accompt here, whether to send the delivery and remaines of the goods up, or whether my books (agreeing with Mr Hassells noates) will be sufficient for my discharge (if please God I live to see England) to the Royall Company, which obligacon (with those many past) will for ever give me sufficient cause to remainc your Worships most obliged and obedient servant. 420. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 17 Nov. 168l These at che request of the bearer I present your Honour with, having been severa\ltimes solicite d thereto per sevcrall of !he blacks here. His request co your Honour is that you would please to see him in some manner righted, for Captain How aninterloper halh paniard 3 Cabbisheers at Alampa,15 one is his brolher, who [i.e.How) is now gone to windward. I doubt it will much prejudice our trade at thatplace, for slaves are very plenty there, and this man halh brought some to me whichI have bought, he is a considerable dealer and hath sold many slaves formerly toCaptain Leo[?] Woodfine.26 This he tells me is his only supplycatio n to your Hon.our. I am at a stand for want of good goods of all sorts, as advised in my two formers,one by Mr Wendover and the other per the canoe your Honour sent downe, of whichI have not a word of the receipt thereof. Heer is slaves if I had goods as advised.Have nothing of news worth citeing. 421. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 27 Nov. 1681 Yours dated the 23rd instant received yesterday and then would have answered!hereto, but could not procure a canoe and was loath to send the 5 hand canoe perreason of to great a charge, for I am loath to pay any more then what I am con.strayned to doe. I perceive per your Honours letter that you are much incencedagainst me, per some buissey body who would be thought officious to gaine creditt for former errors hath been tampering with your Honour to doe me a prejudice pera damnable falce and erronius information. I here invoke God to wittncss I did notbuy anything of Captain How, but of Captain Rickard I bought a few smallblankquitts, not considerable to the number you make mencon of, which I nowprotest in the presence of God I never made one ounce of, but have given !hem fordashes, and should I in the past abuse your Honours favour, which heither to hathbeen soe many towards me !hat 1had need live an age to studdy gratitude, neitherdoe I know that they were ever accompted the Company 's commodities, if I had Iwould not have medled with them, and should your Honour give creditt to all suchstories chat may be presented under the colour of fidelity to our Royall Mastersinterest your hands would have noe cessation from continuall perplexity. I doe nowin the presence of !he heaven ly host and Jihovab protest that Ile not medle wilh ordeale or none for me in my beha)fe for one penny or any ocher summ with anyinterloper, and this I humble y offer to your Honours in hopes you will for the futurehave a more favourable construction of my intended cinccrity, which arc bona fidefor my Royall masters interest , and in the end I hope it may be said of me finescoronat opus.27 422. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 12 Dec. 1681 Yours of the 9th of November per Captain Giles Lawrance I have before mee ordering mee to afford my uttmost endeavour to purchase slaves, which I did but wanted goods to purchase them, alsoe to deliver him one moyetie of what I had of each sex, which I did divide in equaJI parts and cast lotts for him and Captain Woodfine, and haveing noe more then 6 men the halfe being 3, hee would not take any more then 3 wocmen, for which I have taken four receipts and have herein inclosed three. I have been long without a letter from your honour, which was the occasion of my silence. The 5 hand canoe with Captain Quow and Humphrey Davis arrived here on Satureday, bringing with them James Mills and Captain Lawrances boy, and within an houre after [I] sent your honours letter to Captain Lawrance to Mingo, who departed hence on Thursday last early in the morning, and yesterday his boate arrived and today have taken the aforementioned gentlemen and is gone downe. Captain Lawrance in a letler to mee, desires his service to be presented to your honour. This morning the Arda canoe arrived here and brings news of Thomas Gouldings death within 17 dayes after his arrivall, and alsoe Captain Rickards dispatch from thence , and that Captain Wybome has settled a factory at Whiddah. 28 I have here also inclosed sent Octobers and Novembers accounts to the 5th instant, whereby your honour will find due to my Royall masters 1Jm 3oz 9a Ita and what slaves remayne s, onely what is aboard Captain Lawrance to be deducted and is not in those accounts because delivered the 8th instant. I humbly begg your honour to peruse what l formerly writt for both for necessaries and goods. 423. Ralph Hassell & William Pley James Fort, Accra, 23 Jan. 1681/2 These arc only and chcit1y to supplycate you to give me a line of advice, for itt is long since have received one from you, which makes mee conjectu re you are unmindfoll of us here or at leastwise have us in great disrespect, for by Captain Woodfine had not a line directory for our proceedings, only an order to deliver him what slaves wee bad ready and to take receipts for the same, which hee denied , only giveing one for 7 woemen and 6 men which I have here lnclosed sent your honour, takeing a coppy thereof under test for my security. Captain Woodfine stayed here not above 8 hours. Mr Wendover, his factor and mate came about an houre before the ship and carried the slaves in a 5 hand canoe. Mr Wendover informed mee hee had swome against mee about a parcell of blanketts that came from on board Captain How, which hec said in the presence of the major part of the fort that you forced him to doe itt, else hee had not gon for Whiddah. 29 If your honour require test of his word itl shall be at your service. I can produce evidence he never hadcome from England but for being sued to an outlawrie for perjury (my test is MrKirkam Junior in London), and I have in presence heard him objure both father andmother, and if such criminal) oaths may be admitted I lay my hand on my mouthand with an humble silence submitt to your honours grave censure, and since perCaptain Shears and Charles Towgood understand that your honours sent letters byhim for mee which both Mr Pley and myselfe will aver I never received, althoughasked rum for them, which how ill your honours may resent my silence, imputingit to neglect, l know not. I have inclosed sent an account of Decembers sales, whichfinding right please to noate in conformitie. I received from Captain Shears 20sayes, and 20 red perpettunaoes, 66 chests cornc, 1040 bricks. Musketts if yourhonour s please to send that are good and bright, I can sell 500 in a month as I ampromised, and all other goods will vend, powder excepted, for they have beenglutted with that formerly. Ahenesa is now in battalia with his army marchingtowards the Achjms.30 If hee overcomes we may expect slaves, if [he is] over coma better trade for gold then hath been many years, and how to hope for success oneither side is dubious, for if overcome these [Accra] people will never be in sub.jection as now they are, but will increase dayly more and more and old grudges willnot be forgott. I requested your honour to send brandy, tarris, trees and othernecessar ies for rebuildin g and firushing the tank, with wax, ink and paper, beingnow wholy destitute of either Tmust perforce hereafter continue silent unless sup.ply'd. I humbly begg your honours favourable construction of all within mentioned,being nothing but verity, and with a full resolution to continue in my Royall Mastersinterest and advance itt as far as possible in mee lyes and with an unfeined resolu.tion to serve your honour as your commands shall direct, being constant in myperformances. 424. Ralph Hassell James Fort, l Feb. 1682 Your Worships letter of the 29th January I received, wherein as I find you arepleased soe far to creditt my former letter as to demand my atestation of MrWendovers words, soe I have here enclosed it with 4 wittnesses. And I assure yourWorship I esteem it a very great favour that you were soe kind as to send a coppieof Mr Wendovers letter etc. and I hope my future actions will approve me what Iprofess as honesty and justice to the Royall Company.Mr Shears delivered here 20 sayes and 20 red pepettuanoes, come and bricks,for which Mr Shears hath creditt. The corne out of Captain Rickard amounted tonoe more then I wrote your Worship. What slaves possible I can (now, or at Ahene.sas returne) will purchase for my Royall Masters interest. pS. All what things did appertaine to Mr Wendover which formerly have renderd an account are here, with incre~e of his cattle, and when you please to demand them shall be punctually according to command renderd to your Honour. What musquetts wee have here are all out of order, elce could have vended them ere this time, hope a supply of 500 from your Honour, which vends now and nothing elce for slaves. James Fort, Accra, 23 Feb. 1681/2425. Ralph Hassell Yours of the 11th instant per the Cabo Corso Briganteen, Mr Towgood Commander, have received, with 200 musquetts, 200 paper brawles, 40 sayes, 25 perpettuanoes, 100 herba longees, 50 Guinea stuffs and 30 blankeus, which I will use my utmost endeavor to dispose of for my Royall masters interest for slaves and gold, as your Honour directs. Att present all manner of trade is soe dead that at all the fo1ts here has not this two months taken 4 ounces. The reason is Ahenesa hath been out against the Arcanies and Akims, soe not any traders from any parts dare adventu re to come downe, but this day news came that he had taken the Taffo country with some few slaves, the major part of the people fled for succour to the Akims.31 This day 3 slaves was brought, 2 woemen and I man, but I bought them not by reaso n to great a price, which was 9 musquetts apeece, which in my apprehension is extravigant rates for my Masters proffitt. If Alhenesa is conquered this will certainly be a place of good and considerable trade, if not he will suffer noe Arcanie nor Akim to buy any thing here but what comes through his hands, which he makes double proffitt off, soe expect what the events will be and in the meane time hope for the best. [I] shall also foflow your Honours order in demandin g satisfaction of Ahenesa for the 100 rnusquetts.32 Also inquiied of the soulders here what man had the 50 musquetts, and theGunner Thomas Barrett inform'd me it was Quobing, and that he delivered them himselfe, which shall likewise be demanded. I have paid him noe rent since I came nor has not been paid for severa ll months before except l bcnda per Mr Nightingale. In your Honours you are pleased to charge me with extravigant expences at Cluistmas. It hath allwayes been acustomary to give more then what Jcharge in my account, and whosoever lived here will informe your Honour, and Mr Pley can verrifye the account in that respect and more then what I charge, soc begg your candor therein. Your Honour writes and has likewise sent downe Humphrey Davis to be my assistant, but in what capacity I cannot imagine he is able to assist me as Mr Pley hath done, for I dare not trust him as a second to keep the key of the warehou se by reason he had not given any security as Mr Pley hath, in whose fidelity and abilityI could confid, and [he) always delivered every months account just to mee accord.ing to noeates given him, and your Honour does me a great diskindness in bereave.ing me of his good company. I leave all the relation of affaires to his information.I have found all goods right that has bee under his management which has been allhere, but this month I found a musquett under one of the Arda's bedds, and whipthim severely for it. He confest his crime and likewise charged a free black, Ashumaone of the black souldiers, to have been in confederacy with him in stealing 9 more,which he mistrusting run away the day before, but if I can catch him I will send himaway on the Company account ,33 also 6 bares of iron which is now wanting and 1blew narrow baft which he threw over the wall when he went to turne them as theywere drying, which wee here doe by reason of a damp warehouse every month. Ihave paid Mr Pley his sallery due, which was 2 months, vizt to the I st of March. Ihumbley begg your Honour, if you please to grant it that I am per your Honour continued here, to send Mr Pley back againe as soone as possible, for HumphreyDavis is noe wayes capae itated to aid me, unless your Honour and worthy Gentle.men of Counci l please to order mee to deliver him the key of the warehouse andthat I may be cleare from all things that shall bee wanting when you shall please torequire an accou nt of me. I dispatcht Captain Towgood in less then 24 houres andhave supply'd all his wants for the furthering his voyage, as wood 2 5 hand canoefulls, water and [sic =an] iron bound caske a tunn, and for himselfe dishes, basons,kettles, plates and spoones and all things towards housekeepingYour Honours per Monsieur Barboate34 I rece ived but had not oppertunity to answer, and in obedience to your Commands I treated him with all the civillity Icould, and [as] for the pacquell he gave me none, but he is gone windward in thesloope and suppose he may have sent what he promised as said he would. TheFrench have great hopes to have bought the fort of the Portuguese but they obteyn'dnot their desire.35 I heare of noe place that they are minded to settle nearer thenAlampo, which they tould me, that is Monsieur Penell and Monsieur Robelle ne, more ships were comeing and the new French Company did intend on there, whichyour Honour may hinder per presettlement and give somewhat of a dashey, elceafterwards wee must expect noe slaves thence. Mingo is the best place, for there isboth gold, and the best in Guinea, and slaves, it is not above 2 leagues from Alampo,and if your Honour approves of the designe I will make inquiry therein, and imag.ine itt more feasab le then Tanton Querry and of more conside rable trade per 10 toI, soe expect your resolve per next and leave it to Mr Shears and Charles Towgoods relation. I have inclosed my January account, in which you may perceive that there is small trade at present, and the reasons hereof I have before recited. Charles Towgood tould me you desired a couple of good breading goates which I have of Mr Wendover's and are good, and now have sent your Honour and hope that they will answer what they have done here, for they were good here never bringing less then 3 and 4 apeice and now they are above halfe gone with young. Mr Pley had gone last night had not bad weather prevented him, soe hope your Honour will not chyde him in that point. I have not more at present to inlarge, having in all matters renderd your Honour a perticular account, but this only that when you are supplyed with sheets and sletias you will please to send some downe, being most inquired for here. [PS] I have paid the 5 hand canoemen 3 dayes canky mony. 426. Ralph Hassell Accra, 12March 1681/2 These I humbly present to your Honour with all for covert of Charles Towgoods letters [sic],36 the contents whereof J know not of what validity it may conceme my Royall masters interest. This is the first oppertun ity I could imbrace by reason of a tempestuous sea which has broak e all the canoes att Accra, not one either great or small has escap'd, the Companys 5 hand canoe in the night alsoe although haul'd above 6 foot above high water. This is a windward canoe that brought come which rhave seized on purpose to dispatch Charles letters, and hope your Honour will send her back with all expedition. J have also inclosed my February accounts, which indeed irketh mee to send per reason of soe inconsiderable incomes and soe great expences, which in noe way immaginable could be avoided, which if your honour pleases to cast your eye on will find nothing extravigantlycharged, soe hope you'I not think mee culpable. Yett nevertheless though att present small trade is, I live in hopes better will come to make amends for the bad, soe that interlaceing the good with the bad it will in the end ballance expectations. I could have sold the musketts for gold but will not unless I have halfe gold, halfe slaves. 427. Ralph Hassell Accra, I 8 March I681/2 Your Honours of the 13th and 15th instant is before mee. In the first your orders shall be punctuall y observed, and in the latter you please to express that the Com.panys stock is wasted per expences and that some other way must be found to increase a trade, alsoe why I made noe prevention to save the canoe, to all which I with humble submission desire to answer with your Honours permission.lmprimi s, I am ccrtaine that noe one here hath been more desireous to gaine your Honours favour and my Royall masters good will per saveing of them money and not to beextravigant of others bulces which arc soe far above mee which with a word maycommand all that I have from mee, and likewise I have never charg'd any thingextravigant in any of my accompts. Secondly, for a speedier way of finding anincrease of trade, I have studied and ponderd on all immaginable mcanes butnothing will be of a trade till the warrs are over, that the waycs may be free for upcoun trys to come downe, which I conjecture your Honour is sufficiently senciblethereof, which if you please to aske any black that can informe you of the same.Thirdly, for prevention of the ca noes being broake , had I knowne that the floodwould have come in the night I myselfe with all the helpe I could gett would haveprevented ill, but this I humbly offer to your honour, shce was haul'd up as high asever any canoe was yett all Accra, but soe high a flood I never yet knew. YourHonours to Charles Towgood inclosed Jamque[?] of the 13th date I sent irnmediatlyaway to him. These canoemen would not goe to Allampo, soe [11was forced to taketheir canoe and hyre two others which I have paid, and suppose here is answerthereto inclosed, and by reason of your honours order to dispatch your last to himI have sent another canoe this morning to him. 428. Ralph Hassell Accra, 25 March 1682 Your honours of the 2 1st instant have received (with one inclosed to Mr CharlesTowgood) and marke well the contents and shall follow your honours directionstherein. Have now likewise inclosed two of Mr Charles Towgoods. 37 Att presenthave nothing of news, only yesterday a few Anguinah men came downe and laidout above 10 ounces in saycs and brawles and Guynea stuffs. I alsoe sent a smalldashey to the Queene of Anguinah per one Cabusheere of our towne, whoe haspromised to bring trade. I desire your honour to send for some of the hogs that arehere, for without a grea t deale of come I cannot maintaine them, they increase soefast. Yesterday 5sows piged 30 and with what formerly that I have weaned and bredyoung and old there is upwards of three score besides 3 sows more to pigg, whichstock if maintained would be a verry considerable income but with great chargehere. I have destroyed none but have been verry careful! in preserving them. 429. Ralph Hassen Accra, 3 Apr. 1682 Yours of the 28th and 29th last past I received, the first instan t orderi ng mee to putwhat gold l had in cash of my Royall masters the Affrican Company of England on board Mr Towgood , which I have obeyed and likewise what good slaves shall bein the fort. The gold is the ballance of February's account, which if you will pleaseto cast your eye on said account you' I find to be 12 marks, 4 ounces, I angle and 7 taccoes as per coppy of his rece ipt here inclosed, also 6 woeme n slaves on board the Cape Coast Brigante en, Charles Towgood Commander. Mr Towgood hath had a brass kettle for the use of said briganteen. I pray your honour to send some more corne, for wee shall not have enough to last longer then this month. What slaves else remains are bad and have been severall times refused per the Cornpanys ships, soe would not send any that are bad. Accra, 3 Apr. 1682430. Ralph Hassell I have wrote your honour per Charles Towgood, Commander of the Cape Coast Briganteen, of this same date, wherein I gave your honour an account l had in persuance to your commands shipt on board the said briganteen 12 marks, 4 ounces, I angle and 7 taccoes of gold, with 6 good woemen slaves as per his receipt herein inclosed, which finding right please to noate in confonnity, to which I humbley refer you. I humbly begg pardon for my brevity. 431. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 22 May 1682 fl is now full 2 months since I have had the happyness to receive a line from your honour, which indeed is the occas ion of my silence. I am dubious all things with your honour hath not been according to your expectatio ns, and the verity is yester.day the bad news of your honours sickness arrived per a Black that came from your parts, which informed mee per word of mouth that you had been soe for some time, which did not a little amaze mee and is the sole occas ion of this and I humbl y crave a word of advice of your health, for whic h I heartyly beg God of his infinitt mercy to restore you to your form.er health. This alsoe accompanys my last 2 months accounts, which should not have been soe long lacking had any oppertunity pre.sentedbefore this. Yesterday I bought 6 as good slaves as any I have seen in Guyney, vizt 4 men 2 woemen. Ahenesa hath taken Coma country,38 and his partner Ancroffe hath routed all the people from Ningo to the River of Volta and all the AJlampas are fled to a place about 4 leages leward of the River Volta to a place called Quitto, 39 all which place I beleeve there is good tradeing , and verry speedi ly the Allampas willreturne againe. Had I a parcell of good sletias they would vend for l Oa a peece and sheets for 24 per bendy. I have sold but 2 green perpettuanoes this month for 14a each, with some other small things, nothing but sletias and sheets are in request. Here is one Benjamin Houlding, a souldie r that left 2 angles per month in England for three years, which time is expired and beggs your honour to consider him in the2 angles per month, that hee may be paid here. I have formerly wrote for somebrandy but have not as yett been supplyed, alsoe for some come. I bought yesterday6 chests for 2a per chest, or else I could not buy any slaves; it is very scarce here. Ihumbly begg your honour if the ship be arriv'd with timber you will please to sparesome for this place, being in great want, will send the dementions per next after Iheare of the arrivalI. 432. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, l June 1682 Yours of the 17th last past yesterday arrived my hands, wherein you are pleased totax mec with negligence in long silence, per which I perceive you had not rece ivedmine of the 2 1 past, in which I hope you' ) be convinced that I was no wayesblameable. This I hope will arrive your honour in salvo per the hands of Mr Smith,whoe hath undergone lately a great deale of damage and hazard, but hope hee hathpast the worst being now soe neare home. I know not what weather you have hadatt Capo Corsoe, for since my last wee have not had 24 hours of faire weather,which hath done us much damage, for almost all the out works is falen or ready tofall, which Mr Smith hath viewed and hope your honour if you have any sparetimber to send some downe or order for the provideing, for wee are much necess i.tated here for timber and lime. This with Mr Smiths full rclacons I hope of thingsin that respect will be sufficie nt. Mr Charle s Towgoods vessell sprung a very greatleake here, soe that I fear' d shee would founder, but l did my endeavour to preventall damage and aided him with all assistance in sending 6 lusty men slaves to pumpher, but now I hope shee wiIJ doe well, being gon downe to Tishen about 4 Jeages oft 0 to borrow some helpe of the carpenter of another ship which is promised him.I tooke noe goods out of him as yett, haveing noe occasion att present for suchgoods as hee could spare. 433. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 25 June 1682 These serves for covert to the two inclosed from Captain Starland and from MrTowgood,41 which last night late I received included in one from boath of them desireing mee to hasten them with all immaginabl e expedition, which I have done,not knowing the contents thereof but what Mr Towgood in his informed mee beehad sprung another dangerous new leake. Your honour in your last informed meethat Captain Shears would be ready to saile in 2 day' s but as yett not arrived withany provisions towards erecting or supplying our buildings, which l have alrea dybegun and shall want good timber for all the 4 flankers, which 16 pieces 24 footlong will serve, if 23 foote some small baulks and boards with nailes, lyme to plaister all the works; these provided the fort will be better and stronger then ever yett with a very small charge, for I have now 3 maisons atr work and a carpenter which I borrow from the Dutchman. I have now upwards of 50 slaves in the forte, which eats a chest of corne every day and I cannot gett any for money here. I have once sent my 7 hand canoe to Barracoe for come and itt costs with charges 3a a chest, which formerly 1bought for 2 here. This day I paid 2 paper bralls for 2 chests. And slaves comes in very plenty and 1 not haveing provisions to supply them, I must send my canoe to windward this night for more come. They are somewhat deare in their slaves as yett, but the Portuguezc nor Dutch buy's none soe I will lower them as much as possible I can . I give now not above 6 pezos 1 for men as your honour has rated goods, and question not but to have itt lower then 6 pezos for men and soe accord.ingly for woemen, but Ile not buy any but choyce slaves as hitherto have done. I have not now by mee 8 peeces of good sayes and all the green and blew perpet.tuanos are gone, and Guyney clouts, soe pray a supply of those goods and them that are good and all in cases or chests, for all the goods before the last parcell were without any, soe that here are very few good goods (though great quantity) but what are damag'd and of small validity. Itt is thought nay said that Ahenesa will speedily be att home with considera ble quantities of slaves and gold which will be brought here, soe shall advise your honour as occasion serves. Mr Wendovers hoggs has come to great mortallity, for within this month of great raines there has dyed 15 breeding sowes, shoats, and 2 very large boars, besides piggs and most of the sowes with pigg, all well over night and dead in the morning. I wrote your honour for a butt of brandy but as yett Captain Shears is not come, which wee now much want. I have bought att great rates this 2 months out of the Dutchman and cannot be supplyed now; our people humbly beggs your honour to supply them these fogg times, for two are now sick. I had almost forgott to intreate your honour that above all things to send downe IO paire of strong irons and 20 or 30 paire of short irons, for this day I have borrowed of the Dutchman, and some paper, for I teare my books for this, some iron wedges and a maule42 to cleave rock's. 434. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 5 Aug. l 682 Yours of the 2nd instant l have received, and your honour indeed may wonder att my silence, which indeed hath been occasio ned by sicknes s and alsoe per a sting of scorpion on my right hand, which I could not till this day hold a penn in my hand, else had not been negligent in performing my duty. I have received from on board the Affrican Merchant, Captain Samuell Starland Commander, 25 perpeltuanoes, 50 iron barrs and 50 Guiney stuffs,43 and likewise have received from 011 board the Cape Coast Briganteen 25 perpcttuanoes, 20 saycs and 48 tapsells,44 and sayes willbe wanting in a short time. I am extreamly troubled to informe your honour that onthe 26th of July wee lost 13 men and 1 woeman which gott out of prison in thenight, although a centry stood au the doore. They undermined the prison walls andgott out, which was the strongest place in all our forte. I shewed the place to MrStarla nd and MrTowgood whoe will render your Honour an account thereof. I haveused my uttmost endeavour ever since and have sent to all parts and as yett cannothave any intelligence , which is a dayly and nightly perplexity to mee. I have gottup two flankers as high as the paveing and shall goe forwards with all vigour.Ahenesa will (as is reported) returne to Quomboe the next weeke and then mayexpect a supply of slaves. For upwards of 5 weeks here has been 3 or 4 interloperswhich has given upwards of a bendy a head for slaves, soe that could not gett any.I have now putt on board 33 slaves [in] the Cape Coast Brigantcen vizt 12 men, 20woemen and 1boy.45 l have now sent May and Junes account, and tomorrow or nextday another Capo Corsoe Canoe will goe hence and then shall send July's account,this being the last day. If wind and weather permitts the vessell will saile hence toCape Corsoe. The irons, maule and wedges were lost, the canoe being kickadevoodand staved, soe shall want those necessaries. This is all that offers att present,intending to write two dayes hence of all other things that shall in the interimpresent 435. Ralph Hasse ll Jame s Fort, Accra, 9 Aug. 1682 I wrote your honour of what you desired in yours of the 2nd instant, which belcevemay be with you ere this. Likewise of the loss of the slaves, which I have ever sinceendeavoured to rcgaine. I humbly begg your honour not to impute itt any wayes tomy negligence, for I will in verryty certifie your honour that duely and trucly a goodwatch both of whites and blacks is kept every night, and for the future if any slavesbreaks through the prison I now have built I will be responsable for. Itt is 4 footthick and 3 fool in foundation deepe . Capta in Starland and Mr Towgood is now inthe road windbound, they have in all about 100 slaves aboard both thei.r vessells,and I supply their wants both with wood and water. If they stay here any time, Iimmagine Captain Shears may in a manner be up as soone as they with his loadingof slaves per what I under stand by a canoe last night from AJJampo. Abenesa willbe att home this weeke with great quantity of slaves, and then shall render advicewhat progress hath made in his atcheivmen ts. Hee hath conque red the Commongs,which was a veny grea te people. When hec is att home and [I am] certaine thereofI will either send or goe my selfe if the people will admitt mee. I have here inclosedsent your honour my Jully's accounts as your honour demanded. 436. Ralph Hassel l James Fort, Accra, 28 Aug. 1682 These are on purpose to acquaint your Honour that on Fryday last here came downe severall traders from Quomboe and laid out what mony's they had in say's, and have taken all that are good; and amongst the rest Ahenesahs cheife son with 30 or 40 men whoe were sent on purpose to carry mee up to Quamboe to treat with his father about the prizes of slaves and goods, there being verry greate quantity's of slaves there, soe I have sent up one of my boyes to enquire the verrity thereof. Hee likewise desired mee to write for sayes, sletias, course and fine, sheets and halfe barrels of powder, per reason whole barrels are too great a weight to carry soe far in the country, alsoe for currell if any att Cabo Corsoe. These are all that was desired, soe hope your honour will supply mee per Satureday next, att which time I expect the same persons againe, alsoe would desire your advice if convenient for my journey. I am willing to adventure for my masters interest any where, haveing been there formerly and had a kind recept ion. I have finished one flanker and another the beames are laid, and alsoe am now a breaking of stones to finish itt and soe goe on with what speede possible with the other works. Lyme is the onJy thing wanting and here is shells enough att the waterside about 5 leagues off to serve our turns if could but gett them here. Mr Shears hath severall times fetcht from thence, soe he knows the place verry well. Also [ we need] a couple of good beams about 15 or 16 fool Jong for the tower, about 9 or IO inches square. In my last I advised your honour that the wedges, maule and irons were Jost, if slaves comes I shall want irons for have not above 10 paire that are good, soe a supply of all these are needfull. I shall from time to time render your honour advice as occasion shall proffer. 437. Ralph Hassell [to Agent-General & Council] Accra, 2 Oct. 1682 Yours I have received saying [you are] admireing you heare not oftener from mee. Itt is now I must acknowledge a month since I wrote you last , which putting my Royall masters to 8a charge, and your honour formerly charg'd mee with extrava.gant chargeing in my accounts, for that reason I am as provident as I can, and would that I could in any manner save what expended that might be thought surplusage. In your honours last you ordered mee to send up my accounts with the ballance , I have made them up to the 5th instant, and what comes between this and then shall be transported to the next account. The ballance of the last account there is due 10oz 15a and odd tacco's, which I have not sent (for which begg your excuse) by reason that 12 day's hence is pay day and then must pay 11 oz and odd. If trade comes not I know not how men can live, for every thing of provisions is soe excess ive deare that scarce a little come but by the taccoe can be had heare. Most of all our people has been sick; Humphry Davis is now soe weake that I know not whether ever bee may recover. John Fishpoole died the 10th September, bee had of mee 8a before his death for pay, and itt wanted 5 dayes of a month. Hee left nothing but a few old cloaths which hee gave amongst the men to drink att his funeral!, which wasapprased at 8a. [PS] I immagine Captain Nurse will sailc hence for Cabo Corsoe in 2 or 3 dayes. 438. Ralph Hassell [to Agent-General] Accra, 2 Oct. 1682 Your particular letter per Captain Nurse I received and likewise your generall letter.In your letter your honour admires the hoggs, goates etc. were not sent up. I asked them to doe itt but they refused, haveing noe roome. Alsoe your honour is desireousto heare oftene r from hence, which if you please to inspect in former letters youmay see that your honour blames mee for too much char ge in my accounts, and forthat only reason I send noe oftener then you plea se to order mee, for 8a to carry aletter of noe consequence twice or thrice every month will amount to monys;therefore I humbly bcgg you not to censure mee negligent. I have now made up myaccounts to the 5th instant and have inclosed sent them, per which your honour willsee the scarcity of mony and slaves here, which is occasioned by shipps rideing here, for this month has Jayne one or two ships in sight and this day is a small shipcome downe, which will make a bad trade for above this weeke longer here if heestayes. Captain Nurse will have on board tomorrow if his sloope getts up (as she isin sight) the best part of 300 slaves, as l conjec ture by their view. Hee purposes tostay about 2 dayes longer here. 46 I have not as yett put anyth ing aboard him, only2 men 2 woemcn, till the day that hee sailes, which will be 2 dayes hence. Yourhonour with the Councill ordered mee to send likewise the ballance of my accountsper the canoemen, which if you please to view them you will find to be due 10oz15a etc. to be due as the 5th instant and on the 14th will be pay day, att which timeI must pay 11oz and odd, and if trading continues soe bad and should not have[ money] 10 pay them the men might starve, for everythi ng of provisions is extreamedeare here, that ill is not hardly to be gott for mony, and through excessive heatecan scarce gett water under 9 miles. Most nay all our men have been sick with onedistemper or other. John Fishpoole , a souldier, died the 10th of September andHumphr ey Davis is excessive ill, soe that now wee have here, now Christmas Cockworks [sic], noe more than 2 that stand s ce ntinall of whitemen. This I thought goodto informe your honour particularly of, as ikewise I have abreviated to your honourand Councill. 439. Ralph Hasse ll Accra, 16 Oct. 1682 Yours of the 12th instant per the hand s of Mr William Masters I have received, andunderstand you are sorry I should have soe small a trade after soe greate encour.agement that I gave your Honour of a trade. In answer to which I humbly begg your favours to heare my reasons (which I doubt not but will in some measure render some small content to satisfaction). Imprimis, Ahenesa after his returne from con.quest did desire mee to come up and agree for slaves, which I wrote your Honour 7 and was denyed, and my not goeing there caused severall strangling4 slaves to a quantity to Tishee, where many ships have gott many slaves and gives greate rates alsoe for gold. Here has not for above 3 months been less then 2 or 3 interlopers which have undersold the Company per much, which blacks will goe 2 or 3 leagues to save 6 tacco's. Alsoe Ahenesa is now in much feare of the Achims corning on him,48 soe that within this weeke he hath given considerable quantity of gold and all his captivated slaves, soe these reasons pondered may with others for the future give you content. I have according to your commands received Mr Masters with as much allacrity as possible your orders could direct, and on sight did according to orders and have delivered him 7oz 9a Sta in ballance to this day, which finding right please to note in conformity. I have through neglect (I must confess) omitted 28 halfe firkins of tallow ever since May account, not with any intent of fraud for they are all here and doe not vend. Mr Starland did receive of Humphrey Davis to pay your Honour lo I la 4ta, for which hee has had noe notice thereof. Hee is now indifferent well and presents his humble service to you. I purpo se att the expiration of this month to send Mr Swindall the mony Samuell Stone owes him. Accra, 17 Nov. 1682 440. Ralph HasselJ Since my last of the 16th October per Mr Masters have been silent , which was occasioned through [lack of] matter to correspond on, since which Ahenesa sent downe his son with upwards of 60 people desireing mee to come up to Quomboe to see a great quantity of slaves, sending one son as a pawne for my security, which though your Honour before den ied yett thinking itt might prove for my Royall masters interest, I trespased on your Honours commands and went: where I had civill reception and am safe return'd, but old matters were there debated betwixt us, imprimis, why hee did not pay the debts due to the Royall Company contracted by Mr Wendover, to which hee made an answer Wendover owed him 25 bendy 's for months custom of the forte, and that besides hee had layne with his wife, which he did expect [payment for?] according to the custome of the country. He demanded of mee custom ever since I was here, to which I responded I had not taken soe much money in my time, and itt was agreed hee should be paid on these conditions, that hee with his people should come downe and trade here att this fort only, and that hee should not hinder any other up country people from comeing downe. I tould him likewise that hee had been IOmonths out of his country and that l had [)Qt seen any of his people, and what reason or with what face could hee demand a bendy a month thus. He answers bee was now return'd and would performe whatever hee had promised, provided hee might be supply'd att this fort with such goods as hee wanted, which I answered as far forth as Cape Coast could supply bee should not want if I saw he fail' d not of his word. Then wee proceeded to prizes of goods and slaves, hee demanded a bendy a head for a man and 6 pezos for a woemen. I tould him I would give itt him provided bee would allow mee my prizes for goods, vizt powder 7 pezos a barrell, 5 pezos for say's, 12a for perpettuano's, 3a for brawls, 3a carpetts, 9a fine sletias, Sa course ditto, and other goods to any amount per rates. If your honour thinks meet of this I begg a word of your advice and a supply of those goods I shall now write for per the verry first oppe1tunity. I have now in the fort 50 slaves and hope if you send a vessel) downe with come with expedition I shall gett more, I now desist for want of come. I have sold this weeke to Allampo people 13 or 14 barrells of powder for slaves and itt is verry bad powder, or else might have raised itt to 7 pezos, soe begg a supply of good powder, full barrells and well hoopt. I have now sent up my October accompt the ballance whereof is Im 70z 3a, which finding all things right please to noate itt in conformity. The charges are much by reason of wood, trees and shells, for when a thing is once done well the proverb is tis twice done, and I would not have the same charge to be againe in my life time. I am now about the other halfe of the tower, being breaking stones etc. I humbly begg a supply of goods and necessary's undermentioned. A box of white beads , some blew beads according to this patern and some biger, 80 tapsells, 40 good say's, 100 blanketts, 100 sletias fine and course, 20 or 30 barre!Js of powder full, dry and well hoopt in halves, qua1ters and wholes, 6 chests of sheets or more , some looking glases if any. All these Ahenesa will buy and desired to have them writt for. I humbly begg your Honour to spare if possible 2 hogsheads of tarris for the tank and halfe a sheet of lead for spouts. 441. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 16 Dec. 1682 Yours of the 22nd last past have now before mee, in which you verry much blame mee for my journey to Quomboe and say itt was not design'd for my masters interest. However itt be your good pleasure to conjec ture soe, yett I know itt was [for my masters' interest], for two reasons I will demonstrate. First, as you are all men of reason what pleasure could you immagine I could take in soe unpleasant and tedious journey when itt hath been the death of one factor already, of which I had caution. Secondly, what delight could any man unless a prodigall receive in spending whatever hee had in the company of unknowne people, and such a one I am not, haveing not wherewithall to be lavish of, and likewise I went up to open the way that traiders might come to the forte and that none of his people should goe on board of ships to buy any goods nor any one for them, which I doe verry well J<now there doth, which in plaine is the mine of all these forts. And as for prizes of slaves the agreement was on this condition, that your Honour would ratifie itt, and since your displeasure therein is knowne Ile not performe any contract and have bought noe slaves since. I did renew noe old thing about Mr Wendover and his wife, butt [it] being moved to mee thought good to info1me you thereof , that I might have further inspection in that affaire. I have by Captain Churchey received his account [of?] debts on this day sennitt. On Monday last I sent a messenger to demand these debts and informe Ahenesah how ill bee hath served the Company in not rendering satisfaction all this time, but as yett I heare noe answer. My meaning by noateing my account in conformity is after examination thereof to make mee debtor to ballance thereof, and when you please to order itt and when your orders shall be obeyed. J find your displeasure greate likewise is extravagant expences. I know not of one angle but what was really expended and paid. I am heartyly sorry l cannot gett better traiding, which I have inform'd your honour above. In the margent you likewise order mee to send up Mr Wendovers goods att Accra. I know of none but houshoid stuff, and 3 sowes, 12 piggs, for I never had any accompt from any that succeeded him, and if your Honour knowes what they are pray informe mee and send an oppertunity and they shall be sent up. I wrote your Honour per the last the great necesity wee stand herein for want of come, yett have had noe supp ly. I can gett none here. Pray send for the slaves up or elce they will starve. I have here inclosed sent up Novembers accompt. I find errors in the goods sent per Captain Churchey, which please to rectifie. In the case no.447 is mentioned 30 blanketts, which all the men in fort can justifie there is but 25 and many rotton att the edges and much motheaten. Likewise in the case no.251 with chalke, for the black marke cannot be seen, is mentioned 20 good say's, in which case is not one good and I beleeve the case lay halfe up in buldge water or else under the fall of pump water. I open'd only the upper side and lett itt stand in the sun, both the wrapper and matt are rotton. In the chest of white beads no.167M I have not the contents, nor the prizes oflooking glasses that I must sell for, I have ventered to sell 3 at la per piece. Likewise a barrel! of tarras instead of a hogshead. 442. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 26 Dec. 1682 Yours of the 19th instant have received and am much grieved, notwithstanding my sinceer (and not pretended) actions, should not prevaile to give you that conte nt which I did hope might have reception. These accompanys Mr John Winder,49 whoe hath been here 3 dayes ill of a feavour and was by mee desired to stay till bee had received a refreshment after a tedious voyage, and the rogues the canoemen would not be perswaded to stay for him, and other roguish actions which is to tedious to rehearse which [I] leave to his relation ; and had they their desert (which I question not but your honours reason will retalliate) whipping is too good for them. Sincethe receipt of your honours I have examined the letters of the 22nd past, one whichwas the forme r mention 'd but 25 blankquetts which arrived mee per the canoe onthe 24th ditto, but the other per Captain Churchey arrive ing mee the 9th instant ofsame date did mention 30, which I examined by, not noting the former, soe themistake ly's in mce by not examining the orriginaJI, which fauJt pardon, althoughmen ought to examine one with the other, which since Tdid and finding noe moreto be placed to my debt I have tome the letter. I under stand that Mr Towgood is now at Barracoe, whome I expect shortly downe and hope to ship what slaves I have onboard him. I have not as yett any order for the delivery of them , hope may receiveitt per him. This is what all present offers and for trade none presents imthese partsto noe forts. J have bought but 1 man slave this month and gold soe inco nsiderableI am afraid and ashamed 10 relate itt. The Dutch now proffers sayes according totheir Generalls order Ioz and other goods farr below what wee can afford. 443. Ralph Hasse ll James Fort, Accra, 29 Dec. 1682 Yours of the 26th instant 1 received ordering mee to send up Mr Winder etc., which I had performed ere the arrivall of yours. Mr Towgoo d is now here, and shallaccording to order take out such good s as have occasion for.50 Hope ere the arrivallof this you will meete with my former of the 26th instant per the party ordered tobe sent up, I haveing given sufficient (and hope) orders to deliver him lo MrThelwall att Annamaboe. Nothing of trade presents for want of sletias and sheets,which now is the only commodity here , and itt may be as great a drugg in 2 or 3months hence as itt is now in request. 444. Ralph Hassell Accra, 31 Dec. 1682 Yours of the 26th instant ordering mce to secure Mr John Winder etc. have an.swere d and hope is well with you. Likewise yows of the 16th ditto per Mr Tow.good, of whome I have received 200 iron barrs and 2 chests of sheets for whichhave given him a receipt. Likewise have sent up by him the ballancc of my Novem.bers accompt which is 3 marks, 4 angle s and 4 tacco's, not knowing when 1 mightmeet with such an other opperlunity, and as soone as this month is expired myaccompts shall not be wanting. 445. Ralph Hassell Jame s Fort, Accra, 8 Jan. 1682/3 Yours of the 3rd instant have received late att night the 6th, in which you say youmuch admire why I should detayne the Royall Companys canoes, which indeedyou may admire if itt were soe, for I did not desire one houre of their stay here more then till next morning till Mr Winders cloaths were wash t and dryed, and that they had letters for you I knew nothing thereof. As [for] the canoemen lett Docter Griffin aske the boatswain of the canoe if ever J opened my mouth about any letters or in the least way's offered them mony for the delivery thereof. I call God to wiLtnessI never thought soe much, which I am per Mr Winder informed was said against mee, and that I put 2 of the canoemen in irons is as falce as the other; and to write the playne truth I putt 2 men in irons but they were not belonging to the canoes but passengers that were canoemen to William Parris, and 2 canoemen which belonged to one of the canoes stay'd behind, which went up with Mr Winder in the canoe and saved him 6 angles; and the other 2 were released the day after his departure and did offer to stay here and remaine with mee, but these 10 dayes [I] have not seen them. I wonder Mr Winder could not infonne your honou r thereof but because hee would have mee beare the blame in that, as hee doth the other in saying I gave him liberty to breake open your letters [which] is as erronious as any thing ever pro.ceeded out of mans mouth: for how should I know that your honour would write mee, I have not the spirritt of devination and I think nay know my selfe not soe voyd of reason as to give that liberty to my father if hee were living , much less to any man thats a stranger to mee; and to salve himselfe thereof , in a letter of the 4th instant [Winder] desires mee not to denie itt, as itt stands to his future welfare or utter ruine, which letter I have taken a copie thereof and if you please shall be att your service, butthe orriginallshall neverbe seen to prejudice mee in correspond.ing in soe base actions. The sloope 51 hath been gon hence this 9 dayes and hope is with you ere this, and pray examine Mr Towgood about that affaire etc. The canoe.men are in hast and will not stay, else should inlarge, which will per next which will be per via Annamaboe within this 2 or 3 days. I hope Mr Towgood hath delivered 3m Oo4a 4ta ballance of Novembers account. 446. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 14 Jan. 1682/3 I wrote your Honour in my last that I would inlarge in my next, thjs being the scquall. Thought might have kist your hand ere this, but the canoe per via An.namaboe past unknowne to mee in the night. I suppose your honour hath heard how Captain Mingham and his Docter parted and the reasons therefore , hee haveing threatned the Captains death by poyson [he] was unwilling to carry hjm farther for feare rus devilish threats might take place, and worke to strongly on such evill minded persons. Hee arrived here and not being well, stay'd 2 dayes and was blooded per Samuell Stone , and some of rus men being sick aboard did desire the Captain that hee would speake to mee that Samuell Stone mjght goe with them in the ship. Hee made severall proposition s to him before I knew ilt, and [Stone) said if I would give my consent hee would goe, and being earnestly desired per Captain Mingham to lett him goe, I told him I durst not, unless your Honour would order mee. Hee offered mee and has given mee his obligation for 100 sterling to indem.nifie mee from the Company and your honour, and hope your honour will not think itt ill done since hee is still in the Companys service and may be more beneficial] in that imploy then here. I alsoe had one bendy to pay what he owed Captain Phipps and myselfe etc. and one months pay that was due to him, and if that hee stayed here on[ e] hundred years in the capacity bee was in hee would never have paid what he owed, although I gave him his dyett and cloathed him. I suppose your honour has been informed per MrTowgood how the slaves would have rose upon us, but being prevented all is well. I have, humbley begging your pardon, put on board Captain Branfill the 4 greatest rogues and 4 woemen, and have received in leiw thereof 170 ounces of corrall, which hope will turne to better advance , for itt eats noe come , which now is deare. And the canoe which went up with Mr Winder received verry much damage , soe that I could not mend her here, soe have sold her to Captain Branfill for 8 sletias , which shall have creditt in this months account and is more then her prime cost. Jhave hindred all canoes from tradeing with him in this roade, soe that now hee is 3 leagues to leward at Tishee. The Dutchman here paniard some goods that I had sold some Acquomboes, and I have donne the like by him when I caught the goods hee sold, as hee did in my towne, soe pray informe the Dutch Generali if hee gave him such orders, for I conjecture that hee doth itt out of mall ice that they bought them here, and Ile not be wanting to doe as he doth after I heare your answer , neither will I release what I have till hee doth , because hee made the first beginning. This I hope may find your honour with all Gentlemen in prosperous health as itt now leaves mee. Here is now in this road and in this place 4 say le of ships vizt Captain Branfill and 2 interlopers, whose names I know not but one the blacks tells mee is one Salloway a Dutch interloper, and Thomas Travers whoe arrived here yesterday. I have here inclosed sent my Decembers account, which was forgott in my last, and humbly intreate your honour that Docter Askin may be here in case of accidents, being now noe more then 6 whitemen . 447. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 7 Feb. 1682/3 Yours of the 20th past per Captain Cope have before mee, which gives mee to understand your displeasure in detaining the Royall Companys canoes that came from Arda neare 3 dayes, to which I object I detained them not one houre longer then they had sufficient ly refresht themselves, only desired them to stay, nay would have had them but tarryed till next morning for Mr Winder, but my desire with them was not prevailent enough, soe leave itt to your honours judgement. Likewise you write you much admire parting with Samuell Stone one of the Companys servants to Captain Mingham , to which humbly begging your pardon I reply itt was for these reasons: first, haveing some of his sick people and himselfe not well did upon his earnest entreaty grant him, which I doe immagine your honour would not have denyed him had hee wrote your honour, which to further his voyage could not stay. Next, considering itt was to one of the Companys ships and was for the benefitt thereof, of the voyage, hee may as well be serviceable in that imploy as if here and if hee goes to England will be thought of not the worse by reason of serving in the ship for the Royall Companys benefitt. And as for the slaves which were delive red Captain Branfill (if you impute itt as a crime) itt being the first time, with humble submission beg your pardon and shall for the future be more cautious. I have according to order shipt on board the George and Betty, Captain Cope Commander, 27 slaves which hee himselfe accepted of vizt 10 men, 2 boyes and 15 woemen. What your honour desired about Mr Winders letter itt is enclosed, 52 and as to what goods hee landed here that an-ived [in) my sight was some Arda cloaths and 3 remnants of silke of which I bought as much as would make a suite, his cloaths and such not worth your honours notice. I have enclosed likewise sent the 13a due to Captain Phipps 's estate from Samuell Stone; alsoe my January's account. [PS] Only sheets, iron barrs and tapsells are in request: this day have sold 24 tapsells. I am necessitated for a little inke. 448. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 20 Feb. I 682/3 Yours of the 15th instant I have received per the 5 hand canoe, with 3 whitemen, vizt Robert Crow, John Younger and George Browne. You seeme to be much con.cerned why wee have noe greater trade. I have given severall reasons in fonners, as here being soe many forts soe neare that itt spoyles the trade, and that soe many interlopers comeing downe dayly to Tishee 3 leagues to leward, which causes soe great a resort of up country people to flock thither that in a manner all the forts are voyde of trade, for there they goe and noe one mollests them; but if here were good store of sletias and sheets they would vend suddainely. And as to what you write [that] you have not received above 12 or 13 marks in 16 months time, if you please to inspect a little farther you will find 16m 3o 15a 4ta paid, which indeed is a verry inconsiderable sume for the time, I wish cinceerly itt could have been 100 fold more, that then some creditt might redound to mee and not all ways receive cheques and ill resentments. And as to what your honour blames mee in not sending Mr Windovers goods up I askt Mr Towgood to take them in, whoe told mee hee was soe full bee could not unless they were to put upon the spindle of his vaine. I have according to order sent up Christmass Cock, hope your honour will please to send him againe after the worke is finisht. The Portugueze are all goeing away and leave the fort to the Danes.53 The Dutch Copeman here hath as I am inform'd wrote to the Generali to gett itt into their hands: itt stands the best for a leward trade, and ifyour honour thinks fitt intercept the Dutch. Thus much in breife. 449. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 8 March l682/3 Yours of the 3rd instant per Mr Towgood is now before me. I likewise have received6 cases of sletias course, 2 ditto fine, l O barrells powder and 6 chests of sheets forthe account of the Royall Affrican Company of England, which according to order shall endeavour to utmost of power to dispose of for gold. I have also sent up whatgoods are Mr Wendovers, only 5 old chaires and an old rotten table which I leaveMr Towgood to give his approbation of the vallue, also one forke that was stolewithin two dayes after my arrivall here. I have also sent the account enclosed ofwhat is sent. I have now likewise sent 3m 4o Oa8ta, which just makes up 20m. Hadnot the Dutch sent downeyesterdaya vessell with the saidgoodsthat camefromCapo Corso I might have sold all this month that came by the sloope. The sloopehath been here 2 daye s and upwards, but by reason of great raines, high seas andtumadoes could not adventure to unload any thing till weather presented, whichwas this morning. I shall send my February account per the canoe, which may arriveyour Honour before this. 450. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 9 March 1682/3 Yours of the 3rd instant per the Ann Sloopc have received, with IObarreUs powder,6 cases of course sletias, 2 ditto of fine and 6 chests of sheets, of which I have sold2 chests and want the prices of sletias. The powder will sell speedily for a bendaper barrell. The Dutch accidentally next day received the same sort of goods, else should have sold most of the sheets ere this and sletias. All the mony I could maketill the 7th instant, being 3m 4o Oa 8ta, I have per the sloope sent up as per MrTowgoods receipt. This day arrived here two shipps, what they are I know not,which are traders and wilJ imagine goe to Tishae. Nothing of moment presents butas any thing shall offer shall advise. [lnclosure) An account of Mr Wendovers goods sent per the Ann Sloop, Charles TowgoodComander vizt 1silver punchbo le with a cover I lackerd cottI silver tankard I feather bedI porrenger <lino l Arda old cloath3 ditto spoons I case with bottlesI dram cup ditto l fowling peice 4 pewter dishes 3 sowes 2 <linobasons LOpiggs11ditto plates As for the table and chaires they were not worth canoe hire aboard. 451. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra , 14 March 1682/3 My last to you was of the 9th instant , in which was nothing of any concequence but what had wrote before per the Ann Sloope, Mr Charles Towgood Cornander, hope ere this both are received , with the mony sent for my Royall Masters account and also the last months account. I had not wrote now soe suddenly but only for a supply of sheets, the former being all sold and am now importuned for more, if had JO chests this day would have made good sayle, soe if your Honours will supply with what goods will vend, you need not question good sales and good mony. I have 4m now since the 7th instant for sheets and sletias and have refused good slaves for powder because of want of orders for buying slaves. I insert what is wanting underneath, which pray Jett be sent and mony in a month shall not be wanting , as am promised. This morning came news from Allampa that Accruffee and Ahenesas people coming downe to Allampa , they [i.e. the Allampas] are againe fled over the river of Volta;54 and 9 great canoes that came downe for cows and sheep are all retum'd empty, only loaded with passengers, 55 soe that if you purpose to send there for slaves none at present are to be gott. 20 chests sheets att 7-8a 200 course sletias at 5a each halfe barrells of powder, either empty or full, to fill what I have into, for they vend best for the use of the fort a barrell of mallageta 2 pickaxes and 2 shovells 452. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 22 March 1682/3 Yours of the 19th currant per Mr Towgood in the Ann Sloope have received , with 8 chests of sheets, 8 chests of sletias and 12 halfe barrells of powder, all in good condition, only tooke a little welt per great seas coming on shoare, all which according to order shall dispose of to my Royall Masters best advantage. I have likewise followed your orders in sending up what gold I have and have not left one ounce in the fort, the sum now sent is just 5 marks , which finding wright please to advise per next the receipt thereof. Your Honours mention nothing in yours about the receipt of Mr Wendovers things sent per your orders in the sloope. The very next day after the departure of the sloope , being the 9th instant, Ahenesa went to fight to Allampa, eke should have made a large sum. Just as his fetish tells him bemust goe, noe one knew the day before thereof, soe uncertaine he is in all his actions of warr that noe counci l! is to determine the success apparent either maligne orotherwise, but only the dictates of a few braines. [PS] Here is 2 brass pattareras with 2 chambers [with] the mettle soe bad [we]cannot use them; also I gun about 500 lb which wants a vent, soe beg an exchangeor elce order to send them up. Pray furnish me with a little inke, 2 sbovells, 2 pickaxes, 300 barrs iron. 453. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 5 May 1683 Yours of the 3rd instant is now before mee, to which shall according to commandsanswer. Oppertunity before could not find place to answer to your Honours per theletter per Woolliford, likewise per Captain Lowe, occasioned thus, vizt on the 7thpast haveing occasion to goe into the warehouse in the morning to deliver somegoods sold, tooke the key out of my breeches pockett and staid there but a verrysmall time. When I went above I found my scretore open, and mistrusting I waswrong'd (or my masters leastwise) and upon search found what I would not, forweighing the Companys money I found wanting upwards of a marke , and uponexamination understood itt was a free boy that lived with mee. I went and demandedhim of his freinds and they denyed him, on which loath to be wrong'd I caus'd allthe guns that could beare on the towne to be shotted and fued, which were accord.ingly perfonned; and about 3 or 4 hundred appear 'd against our fort with smallarmes and fired. I made as good work as could and did maintaine a fight for 3 dayes,but the rogues all shelter'd themselve s in the Dutch fort att last, and when they sawthat I would have my money againe they called a pallavora and sent the money, butwhat I now insist on is for the payment of my powder and shott, which still theydenie, yett am freinds and have a good correspondency with them, soe if your honour thinks convenient to desist of my demand s I humbly crave a word. And Ithink there is Accra's enough in Cape Coast to satisfie 2 barrells powder and shott,56 which will be better then meddle with them here , for reasons your honour knowes,vizt spoyle of trade etc. These are the cheife and only reasons has hinder'd andprevented mee from wrighting, and [also] their hindering the Companys pawnesfrom comeing to mee when sent for, which if your honour please to weigh in theballance of your reason will find ill not to be suffered where a fort is. The DutchCopema n wiritthis brother about my fireing in his towne, suppose your Honour hasadvice thereof but wee are much together; I have now his carpenter and cooper both att worke and hee hath two of the Companys Black maisons for him. I perceive per your honours that itt is your honours pleasure I should buy slaves att the rates of goods 3 lb prime cost,57 soe desire an invoyce for direction for such goods as have here as per account, that I may know the better to govern my selfe thereby, for goods in England rizes and falls. I have here likewise sent the key of the warehouse and desire itt may be mended, a peece is broken almost off. I have alsoe sent up the last months account and this months, ending this day, per which your honour will find due to the Royall Affrican Company 8m lo 2a I ta, which if your honour had ordered itt up per any one that cou ld give a rece ipt for't shou Id have delivered itt. The Dutch have little or noe goods here. Your honour is pleased to say you will supply mee with what goods I want, which is only sheets and good sayes. I have sayes as per account 42, but 20 I wrote were received per Churchey in the case which are all much damnified, and have not 10 good ones in the Castle. The Dutch has sold sayes as long as had any goods att an ounce, and I never abated of 18a according to your orders for what were good and will not abate but rather rise. Redd perpettuanoes ly's by and spoyles, soe per permissio n begg what may sell for and other damag 'd goods, which doe my endeavour. I purpose to make a genera l I sale of damag'd goods and cleare the warehouse when the up country people comes downe, that they may give notice thereof, but the waters are soe high and cannot pass as yett. It was in Mr Amy 's time58 accustomary once every yeare that soe what were a little damaged might not be quite spoyle'd and lost, and I beleeve here is sayes now that was in his time to my knowledge 4 yeares . Your honour may perceive per my March accompts how sheets sold, and ff had twice as many more they had all been sold att same rates; I suppose there is a good quantity att Cabo Corsoe. I want carriages for most of the guns in the fort, if any spare ones pray Jett mee not want. Likewise powder in halfe barrells; plank[ s], if any some deales, for spouts to convey water into the tank; 6" [and] 8" nailes 12 per hooks and hinges for doores. The raines are verry much with us, haveing not had this 10 dayes one faire day. This I humbly begg may find a favourab le reception, being the verryty of my silence and truth of all the Royall Companys concern s, and as quick expediated answer as your Honour could desire, which per the carrecter you may perceive. 454. Ralph Hassell Accra, 14 May 1683 Yours of the 12th instant I received last night, and had then made answer thereto, but the weather proving bad and the canoemen weary deferr'd itt till this morning. I am sorry to heare that Captain Lumly come to that bad fate,59 but understand perthe Serjant of Axim which they brought downe to Tishae that they gave him his shipetc. againe and [he] related aJI accidents that happened from Axim to this place,which is too tedious to relate and indeed doe not remember all, being spoken inDutch. Yesterday morning one of them [i.e. the pirates] with Captain Thompsonsship past by in the offing, and the Brandenburger, 60 and about I J a clock stood intothe shoare and came to an anchor at Tishee , and about 3 a clock the 3 hand canoepast by here , and question not but arriv'd a day before the ships att Arda and hopeCaptain Lowe will be well provided for them ere they come. 61 Captain Summervillas per said Serjants report inform'd them that Captain Lowe had above 300 marksof gold of the Companys aboard, which made one to hast soe suddainely away, theother is now att Laggue. When the sloope shall arrive will observe all your honoursorders in order to her protection and alsoe to the Royall Companys concernsashoare, and desire noe better sport then to see them land 100 men, for I with theDutch have given small matter to oblige the blacks and alsoe have promised powderand armes if occasion should bee, which doe not feare in the least. They take noegoods nor slaves from any but gold and plate etc. I have been this 3 dayes muchtroubled with the bloody flux, which has not yett left mee and weakens mee much. 455. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 22 May 1683 Yours of the 11th instant per Mr Towgood I have before mee, in which you admire I could not secure money from my boyes. Your Honour may be assured I keepe ittnot soe slightly as may be by you conjectur'd, but as itt was the Companys moneyI ought to endeavour the regaining thereof. I have not hindered noe trade thereby,for the Accraa's have noe money to trade withall; and as I wrought all differancesare att an end and itt is better to make rogues to comply with foule meanes then byflattery, for being once brought under subjection a yoake seemes not weighty etc.I have according to order sent up the ballance of my last Months acco mpt being 8mIo 2a 1 ta per the Ann Sloope, Mr Charles Tow good Commander, and made as quickdispatch for him as possib le could. Had your honour wrote for ballance of accomptsto this day your honour should have had 3m more which have by mee; and questionnot but should within this 3 dayes had money enough to pay the people on next Fryday, for sheets are only now good, and sayes I ques tion not but will vend att therate your honour setts, 1oz. One chest of sayes I begg your Honour to enquire ofMr Towgood, which I opened and bee saw was not good, which I am apt to credittwere sayes has long layde by, and were damaged and much discoloured. Have not as yett opened any more. Slaves are verry scarce and cannot procure any att rates proposed , unless had powder to advance other goods. I could have sold several! barrells this month at 2oz per barrell, but will not disfurnish the fort. [We need] a bale of green perpettuanoes, 300 good iron barrs, and shott from 2 lb to 6 lb, for have but verry few left. Nay in verrity shall have noe occasion for any unless have not timber or new carriages, for to my knowledge never this 4 years was any to supply this place and can scarce play a gun on what wee have. This I wright if any occasion should happen, but as long as under your honours command here none shall ere possess but the Royall Company. I have given an accompt to Boby, Ahenesahs sonn, that on the last of this month all goods both little and much damag'd should be sold, and hee promised to bring downe severall men that are considerable traiders with him and give notice thereof to the adjacent country's. I desire your honour that all the articles that were made by your honour (for good disapline and government of men att Cabo Corso vizt for goeing into towne without my knowledge, whoreing and keeping wenches in the fort, swearing etc.) may be sent mee sign'd by your Worship and Councill , which Ile see performe'd. I have received all things exp.rest in your honours that were aboard the Ann Sloope. I am much in want for some padlocks; I have sent both the lock and key of the ware.house, the brazeing the key was too weake which would not tume the spring etc. The fiscal of the Mina is here att Accra and the Copeman and hee hath sent both to mee and Charles Towgood to accompany them this afternoone, which purpose to doe. 456. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 12 June 1683 Yours per Captain Lumley of the 11th past and 24th per the ketch, Mr John Groome Commander, I have received. I would have followed your honours order in the delivery of the slaves to Captain Lumley, but bee would allow mee but 4 course sletias a piece, one with another, att which rates cannot procure more, neither doe I know when shall att the rates proposed. The raines have been soe greate in the country that noe people can come downe, only yesterday some people came which layde out about 5 bendy's in sheets and one barrell of powder. The last weeke Atta Barba came from Anguina, but I had sent twice before for him to come downe and open the way for a trade from thence, for many up country people come there, as the Akims, Taquoa [var. Toquoa]62 and other nations , soe hee sayes after your Honour pleases to considder itt and send for him hee will waite on you att Cabo Corsoe to discourse farther about other affaires, soe per retume of this canoe I expect to heare what your honours good pleasure is. I wrote your honour in my last per Mr Towgood for iron barrs and green perpettuanoes but as yett have had noe answer, which begg a supply for I have none of those that are good. I have alsoeenclosed my May's accompt whjch is less then what I expected, which was occa.sioned per raines above recited. I am straitened for come, not haveing above 6chests in the fort, and here is none to be had for money att any rates; soe begg asupply within this weeke, elce must send what slaves I have to Cabo Corsoe in the5 hand canoe for they will be starv'd elce. Captain Groome is now at Tishee, and Iadmire hee hath not sent a canoe to infonne your honour what trade, for I told himI would deferr wrighting till hee sent. George Browne sruth that hee left but 4 peranno to his wife in England, but they that cast his sallary up makes itt to be 4 12s7.d, soe that itt will att I 3 months per anno amount to 7a Sta per month but it is sett downe noe more then 7a 6ta per month. 457. Ralph Hassell 3 July 1683 Yours of the 23rd past per Mr Towgood and of the 28th ditto per John Lord in thecanoe is now in view and accord ing to your orders have donn what you requiredand commanded, and with all doe as much wonder as you admire why noe moremoney is remitted, which I with submission reply if trade presents not, I am noe quiner [= coiner?] of gold (which expression pray pardon). In mee lyes noe faultfor itt would certainely redound much more to my creditt and advantage that moremoney presented, and will per Mr Towgood rernitt 12m of gold which I have nowby mee, and would per the bearer if you had in the least commanded I would haveobeyed. Have now under command of the Royall Companys fort the sloope,63 andMr Towgood waites only your orders for proceeding, not that I detaine him butdesire that all things may be don for the best, and desire your Honour soe to cens ure.Shall per Mr Towgood more largely answer, this only begg 30 or 40 chests ofsheetes as soone as possible, for they are much enquired after and have none left and itt will be a meanes to put other goods off. Have nothing elce to add only torequest suddain newes of the pyrates arrivall, that soe I may give advice to MrGroome and Mr Harper, whoe hath wrote me to send them word. 458. Ralph Hassell James Fort, Accra, 9 July 1683 Yours of the 7th instant received yesterday, and immediatly gave the canoeme ncankey money and dispatcht them to Mr Groome. 64 In answer to your honours ofthe 23rd June, I wonder what should be the reason why my wrughts doe not houldout with those att Cabo Corsoe, being the Companys weights given to master of aship, or elce certaine ly greate wrught is made att Cabo Corsoe, for I made goodweight here. Yett nevertheless I have sent up the money wanting, which is 9a Sta.Alsoe now per MrTowgood my Junes accompt with the ballance thereof being 12m [o Sa 2ta. Alsoe you seeme to admire why I take noe more money , considering the quantity of goods I have, which I must acknowledge I never knew this place better furnished for upwards of 4 yeares then now itt is, but if traders are not suffered to come downe, whoe are hindered per Ahenesah, elce Arcany's and Aclcims would bring twice as much trade here as att Cabo Corsoe, and all what ever hee buy 's hee makes them pay treble the prime cost here. I have likewise shipt what slaves Captain Charles [Towgood] would cbuse, which is 4 men , 8 woemen and I girle, 65 and also two carriages for guns, one is for a sake r the other a minion. And as for my complayning of goods being damnified, please to send any of your Councell to inspect them whoe may be competent judges and sett rates on them, Ile be re.sponsable for what hee or they shall vallue them att provided they sell for as much. Your honours orders I have sett up att the gate and am sevee re in see ing them prosecuted according to order, and not one free woeman I suffer to lye in the fort, which seemes tedious to those soe habbituated and make them raile against mee, speaking hardly about ill, which I question not but your Honour has heard thereof or will suddainely, yett nevertheless Ile performe your commands. Have received every thing per the sloope as your honour advised. As for the nero and strafino corall I expect within this day or two a marke for the moi ety, wh ich will answe r what I expected, which will doe more then purchase 4 slaves. Atta Barba is now with mee and has brought 5 bendy's for sheets , and had I 50 chests I would sell them in a months time and other goods with them. Hee purposes to Cabo Corsoe next weeke; this night he goes to Barracoe. Have dispatcht the sloope with wood water and come sufficient for the slaves, and alsoe spar' d I iron bound teirce and l barrell which I expediated as soone as received your command. 459. Robert Young Accra Fort , 11 July 1683 This serves only to acquaint you that on Tuseday night my selfe with Mr Nightin.gale and the sou lders landed here and delivered Mr Hassell your order for the delivery of the fort, which hee noe sooner read but hee immediatly caused the sou ldiers to be drawne up and delivered mee the key of the fort, and as soone as I had possession l read my owne orders before all of them in armes and commanded them that they were in my orders, to dismiss their armes and immediatly to gett their things ready and repaire on board the sloope; but a great sea riseing and night comeing on I sent them away before itt was darke. And likewi se this day two men which I understand had turned the master of the small Barbadian interloper, his mate and carpenter out of the ship in this roade , the master comeing on shoare made his complaint to Mr Ha sse lJ, whoe with a grea te canoe went on board with him and went in. Mr Hassell haveing given his canoemen a signe, they seized them and threw them overboard. The master haveing gott possession of his sh ip againe is weighed and gon off the coast. Wee shall make an end of inventorying the Com.panys goods today and shall if weather permitt send Mr Hassell away in the sloopeto morrow night. Here arrived in the roade an English canoe from Ardra but can notsay any thing of the newes because shee was afraid of the sea which went on shoare, but there is noe whitemen come with them. Wee have sent up to give Ahenesa ackeyand to acquaint him of our arrivall here. Our trade au present is not verry good forgold but indifferant for slaves. The fort is almost as bad as the Danes hill,66 oneflanker is fallen in, but the best is, the tank houlds water verry well and wee shouldnot be behoulden to none but that wee want good spouts, and ifyour Worship thinksfitt to send a few deales downe, Ile doe my endeavour to gett them made by the firstcarpenter that comes downe. Here is some lyme Mr Hassell left to repaire the fort,which shall begin to doe as soone as hee is gon. Here is abundance of goods, butmost of them damnified but what Charles [Towgood] brought downe this last time. 460. Robert Young & James Nightingale James Fort, Accra, 12July 1683 This accompany's Mr Hassell whoe imbarques along with Mr Towgood,67 andaccording to your Worship and Councills orders have sealed his chest and scretoreup and have delivered them to Charles to take care of the seale of them. I was forctto seale them with Mr Hassells seale, because mine with Mr Nightingall's was onboard Mr Sheares, but I shall send itt up enclosed in a letter by Captain Quow. Iwith Mr Nightingale have given him a receipt for all the goods and what wee foundin the CastJe. I hope wee shall have itt in a little better case then itt is at present. [PSl l have received of Mr Hassell 3 marks, 2 ounces and I taccoe of gold for theballance of his account and have taken Charles Towgoods receipt for the same. 461. James Nightingale [to Agent-General] James Fort, Accra, 13July 1683 I render your honour humble thanks for your kindess I have received, but especiallyfor your fatherly advice, and pray doe not doubt but that in all things I shall be verryobedient to your honours commands and will with the assistance of Mr RobertYoung my Cheife doe my utmost to promote my masters interest. I have heard theDutch Copemeo say just after Mr Hassells departure that Mr Hassell had advice ofourcomeing 3 day's before our arrivall here. Your honours will heare all the actionsand transactions against Mr Hassell of the people which are sent up, I doe assureyour honour the one will betray the other. In the interim I refer the rest to ourgenerall letter. 462. Robe11Young & James Nightingale [to Agent-General & Council] James Fort, Accra, 13July 1683 This accompany's Captain Quow and Tom Amamaboe, and have sent enclosed the inventory of the remaaine s of the Company's concerns i.nthis place , and likewise Mr Hassells accompt which [we] brought from Cabo Corsoe with us, and since his departure in one of the room es we have found a ches t where was 30 peeces of Cape Verd cloaths belonging to Mr Hassell, the Serjant and some others , which they bought of an interloper , but most dam ag' d, and likewise in overhau ling the ware.house wee found 31 brass kettles which had formerly been in his account but not in this that we had with us, and have sent I i.kewisea paper enclosed of what George Browne sayes against Mr Hassell, and as soone as hee is any thing well shall send him up per first oppertunity. Wee need not write any thing of the damaged goods for your Worship will see that per the invoyce. As concerning the trade wee can say nothing to att present, haveing not heard from Ahenesah but expect them dayley. Wee desi re your Worship to send downe per first conveyance some iron, blew pautka's and sheets which the natives now enquire after, and by that time hope shall have some money to send up. All things seeme to stand verry well between the natives and us, they being verry well satisfied att Mr Hassells departure and our comeing. Questioning not but throu gh our endeavours to bring a good trade againe. 463. Robert Young [to Agent-General] James Fort, Accra, 13July 1683 l thought fitt to acquaint you how our guns are here, one has a drill broke in itts vent and one a hole in itt's side and another that is soe thinn that noe body durst fire itt, and the two pateraro'sare the same mettall asthe gun which broke on the tower, nor is here one inch of match nor one good truck68 to any of the carriages, nor one bed nor coyne, 69 all being soe rotton that wee are almost afraid to fire them for feare that they should fall to peeces, therefore if your Worship thinks fitt to send downe the two gunns that came out of Mr Groomes ship they will be halfe the defence of the fort, with some match, 2 linstalks, 70 2 shovells, 2 trowells and one pickax, and shall send these mentioned up per first conveyance. 464. Robert Young James Fort, Accra, 22 July 1683 Your Worship and Councills letter dated the 20th July I have received , and this serves to acquaint you that according to your order I have sent up per this canoe Thomas Barrott and George Browne. Mr Hassells boy Toby is in the sloo pe with the two pawnes your Worship writes of, I doe not know (but here is but three) but Mr Hassell and this Thomas Barroll sent one to windward to purchase a 2 handcanoe but hee is not return 'd as yell, soe shall send these two in a small canoe witha letter to your Worship, as judgeing itt to be the best, for should Igoe to take themhere they would give nolice to the other which may be one, but as soone as heecomes downe shall secure him till further order, and according to your orders shallsend tomorrow morning Boquee up to Ahenesa with a man along with her, and toacquaint him that itt is your possitive order shee be releast. 71 As concerning thetrade ill is but little att present and the goods which att present vend most is asformerly wrote, as iron, sheets, powder, and some enquire after blew pautka's. Weehave taken upwards of 2 marks, but paying the people here, that is in pay, hath diminished a little. Here is noe trade come from Quomboe as yett, his sonn and theman which alway's was our messenger is up in the country, but when ill doth comeitt is all att once. Wee have purchased 7 slaves and could have had more, but weestand for one man and one woeman, men slaves being verry scarce here. Here lyethAgent Pearson and Captain Parris. Mr John Groome hath filled some water hereand hath taken in some wood and doth intend for Cabo Corso, his goods being muchdamag'd, but hath 30 odd verry good slaves in and some gold. I have put on boardhim 3 old gunns and 2 patteraro's for to be delivered ashoare alt Cabo Corsoe, theybeing not fitt for any service, and according to your order I shall sett the people lorepaire this fort and will be as spareing in the charges as possible and will not Jettthe Companys slaves build the Dutch fort, and Jett ours fall. Your Worship woulddoe us a kindness if you can spare 3 or 400 hundred of bricks, 2 shovells, 2 trowells,I pickax , with 2 small gunns with things appertain ing, and 6 of the Companysmusketts new and well fixed, for here is not one muskett fitt to use but a man snapsalmost a hundred times before itt will fire. Not else att present Loinlarge but wishingfor a good trade, which shall not want for my endeavouring for to gett in. 465. Robert Young James Fort, Accra, 2 Aug. I683 Your Worship and Councills letter dated of the 26th July I have received, andaccording to your orders I have proceeded in the seizing of what I mett with in thisfort or the towne, which is as followeth, one old man of Mr Hassells which hee keptfor a sentinalJ, one woeman of Thomas Barrotts and one small boy, and likewisehis wench being his slave, and have enquired of the natives of the Dutch Towne andcan leame noe more but that they have one slave of his, a man and one woemanpawn'd to him for an ounce, which slave hec hath already delivered mee and hathpromised the ounce for the woeman. A Monday here arrived from Ahenesah histwo sonns with some Arcany Cabasheers and they tell mee that their father Ahene.sah saith that if I have good goods I shall not want for a trade both for money and slaves, and I acquainted them lhat I bad your Worship and Councills promise for what goods I wanted and have made them welkome. They enquired for sheets but wee haveing none, they have bought some sayes, some powder and some musketts. Not eke at present to enlarge, haveing not as yell a trade to my mind but itt doth not want for my endeavours, Captain Pearson lying in sight and the other interloper and gives a bendy for woemen and a bendy 4 angles for a man in goods or gold. 466. Robert Young James Fort, Accra, 8 Aug. 1683 YourWorships and Councills letter dated the 3rd of August came safe to my hands, wherein I understand that the sloope is not gott as yell noe higher then Amersa, and that by her shall receive the goods I formerly wrote for. Wee doe take some money although the Dutch hath been supp lyed with sheets, iron barrs, sayes etc. 3 dayes agoe by their sloope, and shall use my utmost endeavour to purchase as many good slaves as possible, and as cheape as I can. One ship lying in sight and giveing those rates, wee buy none, but Ahenesah hath promised mee to gett some slaves, against the sloope comes. I would desire your Worship to send downe one chest of good bright musketts, for they would sell here, these being old and have been a long time here. The Dutch sells their musketts and sheets for slaves and disposes of them [i.e. slaves] againe to the interlopers, which hope for the future may be but few. I would desire your Worship not to forgett to send downe the trowells and other materialls. Slaves bought: 2 men, 6 woemen and l boy. 467. Robert Young Accra, 24 Aug. 1683 Your Worships and Councills letter dated the 22nd August come safe to my hand , and am glad the sloope is arriv'd soe that wee may be supplyed with goods and materialls which wee have wanted ever since my arrival). As to slaves wee have purchased 4 men, 6 woemen and I boy, and might purchased more but that had not goods suiteable, which the Dutch furnish themselves with all nations and espec ially of late both English and Dutch, their boates comeing and landing their goods on shoare . And according to your order have sent Mr Nightingale up per the 5 hand canoe and Mr Harper along with him, they being as yett here, and am heartyly sorry for the death of Mr Staple ton whoe was a good servant to the Company, and as acqua inted you formerly have lost one here by an unhappy shott, but they are all fledd and gon, but hope with the assistance of Bobee to gett one if not two of them. And have likewise sent per MrNightinga le my July account with the ballance being, l mark, 6 ounces, 14 angles and 7 tacco's. Not eke att present to inlarge but desireing to dispatch the sloope with goods. 468. RobertYoung [Accra], 2 Sept. 1683 Your Worships and Councills letter dated the 27th August by the sloope I have received, with the receipt for the ballance of my July account and likewise IOchestssheets, 2 cases of sayes, 1 chest of musketts, 5 barrells gunpowder, 200 iron barrs,and 4 yards of green cloath for Ahenesah; alsoe 300 bricks, 3 shovells, I pickax, 3trowells, 2 small gunns, with a spung, 30 minion shott, 20 faulkon ditto, 10 dealeboards, 2 scaynes of match, 2 linstalks, 2 old carriages, 12 granado's, and 6 oldmusketts that will not fue, as your Worship may see per the retume of them, forthere is abundance such here already, but the musketts I desired in my letter to besent downe, were 6 new musketts well fixt. [PS] The sloope staying a day longer then expected by reason of the sea, soe havesent my August account with thee ballance per James Bayly. 469. Robert Young Accra, 13 Sept. I683 Your Worships and Councills letter dated the 29th August by Captain Doegood Ihave received, with 2 cases of sayes, 200 iron barrs, 5 chests of sheets, 30 piecesallejars; and your Worships and Councills order of the 2nd September to deliverone man and one woeman slaves, but hee [= Doegood] did protest here that itt wasyour Worships promise to him, if that Captain Bell did not take any off, then heewas to have 4 (Captain Bell did not come neare this place but went directly downein the offing as far as wee could see him), and have the Company[s] creditt for thegoods in leiu of them; and a letter by Mr Harper of the 3rd instant whoe you orderto live here as my seacond and shall pay his sallary as itt is mentioned ; and likewisea letter of 4th instant being an order to purchase as many slaves as possible and toship what slaves is here on board Captain Draper for Cabo Corsoe (and have sentMr Sheares and Mr Groomes letter down to them). Captain Draper wanted powderto purchase some slaves all Barracoe and upon his receipt have spared him 3barrells of the damnified powder, takeing his receipt for the same. Here is attpresent verry Little trade. Agamaco is gon up to Ahenesah but is not as yell returned.The bricklayer is not come downe, which wee much want. 470. Robert Young Accra, 23 Sept. 1683 Your Worship and Councills letter dated the 14th September by the 2 hand canoewith an express came safe to my hands, and have ever since my arrivall here givenan account to your Worship and Councill how things have stood here by all canoesthat were bound up, and since my last to your Worship have put on board CaptainDraper, 4 men, IO woemen and 2 boyes,72 and if I might have disposed of powder should have purchased some more, and for other goods wee have quantity's by us, but as for the Guyney stuffs that your Worship mentions in your letter there hath been none disposed of or enquired after since my arrival!, and shall use my endeav .our to keepe the prizes of goods up as much as possible. I sent up my August account per James Bayley, which since per your letter I understand is delivered but have as yett noe rece ipt for the baJlance and doe wonder the money should not hould out weight , itt being 3 angles over when weighed itt here, as James Bayley see when I delivered itt to him, and itt agreeing with these weights in the former; and since your letter dated the 18th September, where I find to be on board the sloope 15 barrells gunpowder and 4 chests musketts, but the musquetts for the forts use are not come which are mentioned in the letter and [I] sent the former that bee brought per the retume of him, and shall use our endeavour to dispose of the powde r and musketts which are now come downe (but there is 22 that their stocks are broake) for slaves but as yett have purchased noe more then I man and l woeman. The people that were seized are all on board Captain Draper, but only [ = except ] Mr Hassells whoe is one of our centinalls and cannot with conveniency part with him, but if your Worship orders him up shall per the first oppertunity that presents send him; and for the goods which your Worship was pleased to mention in your letter, here at present noe trade soe cannot answer in that respects, but if any be enquired after shall write to your Worship of itt. I have sent Agamaco to Ahenesah to know why the trade to the waterside is stoped but is not as yeti retum'd. I can not dispose of Daniell Roe's things here, they being intermixt with the things of Thomas Barrotts, soe have put them on board the sloope alltogether and have dispatch her away. Captain Thomas Draper hath been gon from hence this 8 day's . 471. Robert Young Accra, 29 Sept. 1683 Your Worships and Councills letter dated the 26th Septembe r by Thomas Plumer in the 9 hand canoe came safe to my hands, with 10 barrells gunpowder, 5 chests containing 3025 sheets and 1 case containing 25 greene perpetuano's on the Com .panys account. I beleeve wee might dispose of some broad tapsells but for fine sletias there hath been none enquired after. Course sletias your Worship may send some downe per first oppertunity with some Guyney stuffs . Your Worship and Councill hath lowered the goods to undersell the Dutch, which wee shall follow and shall use my endeavours to assist the vessells as much as possible. I sent Mr 73Shears 's letter to him att sea, whoe departed from hence the 17th att night,and likewise Mr Groomes to leward.74 I find that Captain Draper had noe occasion for the powder your Worship was pleased to mention by itt's arrivall . The trade here is by Ahenesab stop'd by reason of the Dutch, and they did not take soe much thismonth as paid their souldiers. Aggamaco is come from Ahenesah and itt's theirdanceing time, but hee saith the Dutch are the occasion of soe little trade and hathnot don well by them which makes his people not to come downe to the waterside,and shall use our endeavours to dispose of the damag'd goods. I shall according toyour order put on board Mr Groome what slaves I have when hee comes up, whichatt present is but 2 men and 2 woemen and att present can verry ill spare them, being just now a rebuilding the flanker which is fallen downe. 472. Robert Young Accra , 9 Oct. 1683 Your Worships and Councills letter of the 4th currant came safe to my hands, anddoe use my uttmost endeavour to dispose of the Companys goods as fast as possi.ble, which if itt continues as this month begins, wee shall have an indifferant goodtrade, altho ugh the Dutch hath since our last supply of goods made a pallavora withhis Cabasheers to the intent that they might hinder our trade, and hath gave out thatwhoever hee be that comes trade with us or is the occas ion of the up country peoplescomeing here hele fire their bourses and tume them out of the towne, which keepsthe blacks much from their usuall tradeing with us, and hath promised to protectthem against Ahenesab and to take them in his fort if occasion serves; and shallaccording to your order put what slaves I have in the fort on board Mr Groome,which att present is but 2 men and 6 woemen. I sent a 2 hand canoe up with MrGroomes letter75 the 1st instant but is not as yett return'd, nor heare noe tideings ofher, which makes mee doubt that sbee is not arrived. 473. Robert Young James Fort, Accra, 22 Oct. 1683 This accompany's James Bayley in the ketch,76 by whome I have sent my Septem.ber accompt with the ballance and what slaves I had by mee, being 2 men, 8woemen and 1 boye , and have spared him I 2 chests come for his voyage up, with some wood and some water. 474. Robert Young James Fort , Accra, 23 Oct. 1683 Your Worships and Councills letter dated the 18th instant by James Bayly camesafe to my hands. This morning the ketch weighed from hence and hath taken in12 chests of come , some wood and water, and have likewise put on board her whatslaves I had by mee in the fort, and likewise my September accompt with theballan ce, and shall use my endeavour that the Dutch may as little undermine us here as possible, though they give all the encouragement immaginable to doe it. I shall want per the next some sheets; our powder and musketts doe not att present goe off by reason of the Dutch whoe undersells us, and an interloper lying in the roade,just goeing off, sells powder for almost prime cost, and his musketts at 18 per bendy. Mr Groome is come ashoare with Docter Meade, haveing noe conveniency to doe any thing for him there, and questions not but in grace of God that hee may doe weJI though att present is very weake. 475. Robert Young James Fort, Accra, I Nov. 1683 Your Worships and Councills letter dated the 25th October by Captain Browse came safe to my hands, with 10 chests sheets containing 650 on the Companys accompt. This accompanys a 2 hand canoe and to acquaint you of the death of Mr Groome whoe departed this life the 29th October about 7 a clock in the evening, and have sent his booke of accounts that every thing might be made even betwixt the Company and him, and what is due to him did desire mee to receive for his wife and children, and what debt hee owes for mee to satisfie them. I have likewise sent an inventory of what things hee hath here and desire your Worship will send an inventory what bee hath on board the ketch. 