VIII OFFRAANDWHYDAH The section of the West African coast east of the River Volta was probably alreadybecoming known to Europeans by the 1680s as the 'Slave Coast' .1 The RAC cor.respondence, however, does not employ this terminology, calling it rather the'Coast of Arda', after Allada ('Arda'), the principal African state in the region. TheRAC bad re-established a factory at Offra ('Ophra') in Allada in 1674,2 and thisstill existed at the beginning of 1681. In May 1681, an attempt was made to estab.lish a second factory in the neighbouring kingdom ofWhydah ('Whiddaw', 'Guy.dah' etc.), to the west; but this proved abortive, the RAC factor left there, JohnThome, being recalled to take over the factory at Offra in August of the same year.At the beginning of 1682, the RAC again sent people to occupy Whydah , but thechief factor designated for Whydah, John Winder, initially took up residence atOffra, and moved to Whydah only in July 1682. At the time of the latest correspon.dence preserved, in June 1683, both the Whydah and Offra factories were main.tained, although the possibility of withdrawing the latter was under discussion. Itwas, however , evidently abandoned soon after. The trade at Offra and Whydah wassolely for slaves; gold was available only as a re-export, being brought by someEuropean traders from the Gold Coast to be exchanged locally for slaves.3The correspondence from the Offra and Whydah factories is not preserved ascompletely as that from the establishments on the Gold Coast. In part, this reflectstheir greater distance from Cape Coast Castle, and the lesser frequency of cornmu-. nication with the latter. Ships which had once left the Gold Coast to the eastwarddid not normally pass back up along the coast. Offra and Whydah depended fortheir communication with the Gold Coast mainly onAfrican canoes and canoemen,which were regularly brought from the Gold Coast by European ships for usefurther east and returned home when their employment was completed; 4 alterna.tively, leuers were carried by ships departing from the coast to the island of Sao Tome, where they were evidently passed on to local shipping for transmission to the Gold Coast. In addition (and partly in consequence of this pattern of shipping and communication ), it seems that the Slave Coast factories for most purposes reported directly to the RAC in England, rather than through Cape Coast Castle. 5 The correspondence from Whydah reproduced here , indeed, includes some letter s sent to the Company in London, which were copied for information to Cape Coast. In addition to the RAC's factory in Offra, the Dutch West India Company also maintained a fact0ry there, which is mentioned in several of these letters. When the RAC began to consider a factory in Whydah in I681, it was noted that there were already a French and a Portuguese factory there (no.479). The French factory here had been established in J671.6 The Portuguese factory may have been established in 1680;7 it was evidently ephemeral, however, since in November 1682 it was reponed to be empty, there being no Portuguese in Whydah. 8 Al Whydah, as reported in this correspondence (no.479), the RAC had been preceded by a rival English factory, established by the interloper Petley Wyburne in November 1681.9 Three of the letters preserved in this correspondence were from Wyburne, rather than the Company 's own factors. The RAC evidently demanded that Wyburne should withdraw, but Wyburne himself refused to leave (nos 491, 495), and the RAC's own factor claimed to be powerless to remove him (no.490). He was still lhere, trading in competition with lhe RAC, at the end of 1683.10 The RAC correspondence for 1681-3 is less illuminating about the indigenous politics which formed the background to (and, in some measure, a determinant of) the patterns of European activity on the Slave Coast. Other evidence shows that, when the Company began trading at Whydah in 1681, the Governor o f Offra had initially forbidden the carriage of slaves there; 11 but by the time of the first letter in the series reproduced here, in May 1681, 'free trade' betwee n the two places had been re-established (no.476). Subsequently, in December 1681, there is reference to a war 'among the Blacks', which evidently involved a threat of attac k on Offra,since the English factory there had to purchase gunpowder for its own defence, andto a subsequent meeting of repesentatives of the kings of Allada and Whydah tomake peace with Offra (no.480, with inclosure l); but the context and significanceof these events is not explained. Other evidence shows that the rivalry betweenOffra and Whyd ah for control of the European trade was comp licated by tensionsbetween Allada and Offra, with Whydah recurrently supporting the latter in rebel.lion against the former, 12 so that the threat to Offra in 1681 may well have comefrom Allada rather than from Whydah. In t11efollowing year Allada was reportedly urging the RAC to estab.Hsh a new factory, at Apa to the east, on the grounds thatthe route to Whydah was unsafe, traders running the risk of being 'panjard [kid.napped) and robed' on their way there, very probably (though this is not stated) bythe people of Offra (oo.484). This implies both that Allada was then sending itstrade to Whydah rather than Offra, and that its policy was to establish access to thecoast independently of Offra, rather than to favour the latter. 13 476. John Thorne Agriffie in Whidaw, 24 May 1681 Alt our arrivall at Whidaw Captain Lowe came to an anchor, and by his and MrGouldings 14 order I was sent on shoare to learne how affaires stood here and auOphra and au which place was most probability of his quick dispatch, and next dayreturned on board againe with answer from the King that if Captain Lowe wouldcome on shoare himselfehee would contract with him for his whole complementof slaves, 15 whereupon he and Mr Goulding went on shoare and the King likeinghis cargoe promised him his slaves in 26 dayes, which might have been accom.plished had there not come two interlopers, a Portuguese and a French ship into theroade. Captain Lowe haveing gott goods on shoare, Mr Goulding bought slaves atSabba [var. Saba] the Kings house, and I was ordered at Agriffie the lower towne, 16 where when wee had purchased his whole complement of slaves hee would havehad the remaines off againe, but finding it something difficult, and Captain Lowesship springeing a great leake, twas thought most convenient to leave the goods onshoare and mee with them men to delay time for the aforesaid reasons .17Ihave built noe Muse yett but if your worship think ill convenient to settle here I desire you to send mee orders for itt, and another man which is a good acácountant, which I judge may be very beneficial for the Royall Companys interest , this place being not above 4 or 5 hours journey from Ophra and the charges being the same at both places. g Besides the King [of Whidaw] and Phido lgo 19 [of Ophra] are great friends againe and are desireous of a free traid againe.20 I have only the 3 hand canoe left and the great canoe went downe to Ophra and was staved in goeing ashoare with the goods, the weather being very bad and Captain Lowe unwilling to stay by reason of the leake, and I understand there is never a canoe att Ophra and desire you will be pleased to send one by the next ship.21 As for the canoemen, I have not paid them their halfe pay,22 because they would not goe downe to Ophra with the canoe and neglected their busieness here for the 3 last dayes. I have been downe at Ophra and find the factory was all burnt downe but is almost finished againe and a very secure trunck built and things very well settled. I find Mr Cross to be a very civill gentle .man a11d none that is as well deserving as capable of the place. I was ordered to be accountable to Mr Goulding att Ophra, but hee being dead and Mr Cross succeed.ing23 have brought U1em to him [i.e. Cross], wboe hath sent them up with his owne. 477. William Cross Ophra in Arda, 18 Aug. 1681 I humbley presume to give your worship the trouble of these few lines to certifie you of my departure witl1 Captai11 Bran fill, and how hee made a shift to pick up his slaves in about 20 days with those goods and some money [which] hee brought;2A but tis very inconvenient for a ship to come here without booges, and if you send none by the next ship, you must hardly expect any slaves; but if you purchase any [booges] att the Mina Castle (where I heare there is plenty) you may be sure of slaves in a very short time, and if you send but halfe the cargoe of Ule next ship in booges,25 any other goods you have will goe off except iron barres. I am sorry I am to send you the unhappy news of Mr Gouldings death, whoe died on U1e 5th of May last, hee lay sick but 4 dayes, all which timeI had the Dutchdocter withhim, whoatt firstcomeingtold mee he was a dead man, after hee understoodwhat hee hadtaken,whichwas too large a potionof somephysickhee broughtctowneherewithhim, being enough for neare threetimes takeing,as the docter told mee,and beingnot sick beforefoundnothingto workeupon but an empty stomack,yettheld himvomitting for two dayes or moreáand the rest of the time lay speechlessand in 4dayesdied about3 in the afternoone.CaptainLowetookein his slavesat Whidda,where hee left Mr Thorne and Robert Chapmanwith the rcmaines,but upon MrGouldingsdeath and my goeing homehee [= Thorne]is come downeto Ophra totakepossessionhere, who is a manthat is verycapable and deservingof theplaceandone thatknowsthecustomeof thecountry,whichis notpresentlyfoundoutbya newcomer, and if your worshipplease to send downe anotherman tohim thatisan accountant,I doenot questionbuthee shall managetheCompany'saffairesherebetterthen anyoneyou canpropose to senddowne.CaptainLowhad promisedtheKing of Whiddah to settle a factory there, for which reason would not Jett bringawaywhatgoodswere on shoareafterhee had boughthisslaves,butwas forcedtoleave Mr Thorne with them, an account of which you will find in his letter, andlikewisean accountof whichgoods hee put on shoareherein inclosed.Since I amgoeinghome,I think tismost convenientformeeto carrymy accountshome to theCompany,and nottroubleyou withthem.I dispatchedCaptainBowlerfromhencewith 87 slaves26 according10 your worshipsorder in Mr GouldingsJetter,and thedirectionsMr Nightingalegave, which has took up almost all the boogesCaptainLoweput on shoare,soe that I shallleaveMrThorneverybare,if youdoe not sendhim some recrute very speedily.Weehad noe goods before but iron barrs, for on the 12thofMarchlasthappened a greatfirewhichburntdownalmostallthe wholetowne together with our factory,but I have neare built ill againe and built a verysecure warehouse,which I have coveredwith iron barrs to secure the goods froma second fire, if it shouldchance to happen. All our goods in a manner were burntexceptiron barrs, of which you will find an accountby Mr Thorns receipt of theremaynshere. I have Mr Gouldings papers and a bill of ladeing for 529 slaves27 whichIhave putup to carryhome to theCompany,butcannot findamongthemallthe account of the particularsof canoe hyre youpaid, 4 ouncesodd angles,whichI have sought after very carefully,findingyou writt soearnestly for ill. The great canoe was staved upon the breakers in comeing ashoare, and wee had a 7 handcanoe here before, which broak loose from Captain Lowessterne in a toumadoe,soe that att present wee have none but the 3 hand canoe to helpe our selves, and Ihave binbeholdento the Dutch forCaptainBowlerand CaptainBramfillboth, forthe use of their canoes, whoe had 3 very good ones,but I have broke two by the badnessof the weather.You may be pleased to send Mr Thorne a good canoe or two with some paddles, here are 13 canoemen already which are pawnes to the Company,soe that then hee shallhave occasion for noe more, but if you send any sendnoe more free men for they proved themselvesrogues to Captain Lowe. PS.Yourworshipmay be pleased to understandthat when you send any ships for thisplace to consigne them to the factor,for if you raise the price of goods (as I havelately seen) the Blacks will never lowerthem againe. (lnclosure] Ophrain Arda, 18 Aug. 168I Receivedby mee John Thorne of Mr William Cross for account of the Royall African Company of England these goods followingvizt.: 2 men and 2 woemen slaves,961 poundsof booges, 12 old musketts,I kitUe, 32 lead ba.rrs,2752 whole barrs of iron and 65 pieces ditto which doe contain30 whole ba.rrswhich are for sale, with380 thatcoversthe trunck for the securityof the goods from fire,which arein all 3090 iron barrs,I sayreceivedby mee U1eday and year abovementioned. John Thorne In Ulcpresenceof us AndrewBramfill AndrewCrosbie 478. John Thorne Ophra in Arda, 19 Aug. 1681 I hearing of Captain Parrisquickdispatch last voyage attWhida, encouraged Cap.tain Lowe to take in his slaves there, but after hcc had gott his slaves, haveing promisedtheKingto setUeafactorythere, hee [= t11eKing]wouldnot letttllegoods which were on shoarebe brought off, whereuponCaptainLowe and Mr Goulding orderedmee andRobert Chapman to staywitllthemtllere, an accountof which you will findherein inclosed.It being pUlto MrCroseschoiseto goe home or stay, hee sent formee downeto Ophra to takepossession of the Companysconcerns, which libbertyI could hardly obtainebecauseof Captain Low's promise to tlle King, but wasforced to come awaywithoutmy tllings,neitllercan I gell the otherman away, but thinkit convenient(with your worshippsorder) to keepebothplaces, for I find them verycivill and obledgeingthere, and a place as plenty of slaves as this, and arcwithin fourehoursjourney one of the oilier,and by keepingbothplaces will be a furtheranceof the dispatch of all ships you shall send downe; by which if you send booges a good quantity,with aJlmostany oilier goods you have you cannot wantslaves,forilieyare veryplenty.I humbly beggof your worshippto senddowne a man or two, and one in the roome of JamesBoyde, for bee has been very falceto Mr Cross, and promisedthe Blacks 12 slavesin goods, if they would send him[= Cross)away,and makethe othercbeifc,so thathee mighthavethe commandof the factory,to imbazle thee Company's goods as he pleased,but some of the Blacks haveing a kindness for Mr Cross came and told him of ill, wherebyiu was pre.vented, lhis is lhe greatest occasion of his [= Cross's] goeing home now as heehimselfehas told mee, and as far as I understandlhis rogue has the samedesigneupon mee, forI haveheard someincliningof ilt,and amsencibleby lhevery samecraft this factory has often been ruinated, and the Company not only lost theirgoods,bUla greatmanyhonestmentheirlives,thereforeI hope youwillbepleasedto takeitt into consideration. Weehave greatoccasionfora canoeor two,andsomepaddles,the great canoe was stavedupon the breakers,and a 7 hand canoe whichwas here was broken adrift in a turnadoe,soe that at present wee have great wantof canoes, and you had as good send noe ships as noe canoes, for without lhemnothing can be done. Pray send some booges by lhe next shipping, and they willpul off any goods you shall send downe besides, wilhout them you must expectliule lo be done, for tis all one their moneyhere, as silver and gold is wtb us. [PS) Mr Goulding died on the 5th of May last and MynherLu.nklhe Dutch Cope.man28about a monthafter. [lnclosure) Agriffie in Whidda 20 April 1681Warehouse is debtor to severalJ goods in the possession of mee John Thorne for account ofthe Royall Affrican Company of England,vizt. Value of goods in slaves344 small brass panns all 40 pound per slave 08.006 course sletias att 4 per slave l 1/1002 longcloaths att I per slave 2008 broken bunches of beads vallued alt 00.10I iron barrs alt 12 per slave 08.490 mannilloes att 220 per slave 02.003 pintadoes with 50 odd manilloes 01013 musketts vallued all 02631 pounds of booges alt 78 Jb per slave 08082 kettles great and small valJued att 08001 piece of red cloath received from Mr Cross vallued 02078 pounds of booges received from ditto Ql 45. Per contra is creditor, Whidda 1681 No.of slaves By 2 kettles and 2 mus.kelts sent Mr Cross alt Ophra 01By 2 course sletias paid for the use of the trunck 00. By 2 slaves in brass pans paid Captain Blanko29 for 2 slaves shipt on board Captain Low 02 By goods paid for 22 slaves sent to Mr Cross alt Ophra and shipt on board Captain Bowler, July the 7th 22 By goods paid the canoemen for worke done on board Captain Lowe to the vallue of 08. By 48 gallons of brandy for the use of the factory for 4 months art 12 gallons per slave 04 By 312 pounds booges for my owne diett att 78 lb per slave for 4 months 04 By 78 lbs booges for Robert Chapman bis diett for 4 months att 1/4 of a slave per month 01 By 20 lbs booges for Andrew Crosbies diett for a month 001/4 By 2 slaves bought, remaining for the use of the factory 02 By 22 lbs of booges for slaves victualls and cloatbs 001/4 By bammacks and dasheys to the King and other great men in red cloatb ~~~a 00 Balance at Ophra in Arda, August 20 1681 481/2 By ballance of the gaine said account the Royall Affrican Company is debter to mee 3 slaves errors e}(cepted,per mee John Thome August 14th and l7th. The 2 slaves bought for the use of the factory died of the smallpox. 479. John Thorne Ophra in Arda,4 Dec. J681 Heareing of Captain Parris quick dispatch last voyage att Whidda, I encouraged CaptainLow to take in his slaves there, and comeing to anchor in the road I was sent on shoarebyCaptainLowe and Mr Gouldingsorderto know how thingspast as well att Ophra as Whida and in which place I might best and soonest purchase his slaves,and the next day returning on board againe with answer from the King that if CaptainLowe will come himselfe on shoare hee would agree with him for his whole complementof slaves,whereuponCaptainLowe and Mr Gouldingwent on shoare and U1eKing likeing his cargoe promised him his slaves in 26 dayes, whichmight havebeen accomplishedhad there not come two interlopersinto the road, a French man and a Portuguese. Captain Lowe haveinggou goods ashoare Mr Gouldingbought slaves au the Kingshouse au Sabba [var.Saba] and I was orderedatAgriffiethelowertowne,but afterheehad gott all his slaves,andhaveing beforepromisedthe King to settle a factory there, bee[= the King] would not lett the goods whichwere on shoarebe carried off, whereuponCaptainLowe and Mr Gouldingorderedmee and RobertChapmanto stay withthem there,an accountof themyou will findenclosedherein.Thereforeif your worshipbe pleased to settle a factoryletl meehave your orderforitt, that I may make provisionforthe receptionof any ships you shall be pleased to send. I have little to say in tl1epraise of theplace, only itt is something more healthfull then Ophra and is a place of free tradefor all ships that comes. TI1ereis two factory's already,a French and a Portuguese,and interlopers dayley frequent the place. I have done my best to prevent them, tothe hazard of my life by one Captain Beacon, who sett a pistole to my breast but Iprevented his designe, for t11eBlacks will have noe striveing one with another butwill haveall ships trade that comes.30 Thereforeif your worshippplease tocontinuethis place atWhidda itt will require two whitemen, forI have but two withmee, foritt beingput to Mr Crosses choyse to goe home or stayhe sent for mee to Ophra totake possession of the Companys concerns, the which libberty I could hardly ob.taine because of Captain Law's promiseto the King, but was forced to come awaywithout anything for my necessaries,neither can I as yet gett the other white manaway,thoughI have made tryall to the loss of all that I brought out of England withmee. If both places be kept ill will be a meanes to dispatch ships the sooner, forthere is bull 4 or 5 hours journey betwixt them and you cannot miss of slaves atteither place if you send any quantity of booges, and they will be a meanes to putoff almost any other sort of goods except iron barrs. A note of what goods isvendible you will find inclosed herein.Weehave great occasionfor a canoe or twoand some padles. The great canoe was stav'd upon the breakers and the 7 handcanoebroke awayfrom the steme of CaptainLaw's ship in a turnadoe,soethat weehave great need of canoes and you had as good send noe ships as nae canoes. Forcanoemen I have 13 here, and if you send downe any more pray Jell them bepawnes,forthose whichcame with CaptainLowprovedrogues. For thelast 3dayeswhen there was most occasion for them,could not gett them to carry offthe slaves,to Captain Lowesgreat damage, but was forcedto hyre others, for which offence Ihope your Worship will be pleased to take itt into consideration. Captain Lowedeparted from Whidda the 20th Aprilllast with his complement of slaves and sentMr Gouldingon shoare au Ophra, and what goods came on shoarc iliere Mr CrossI hope certifies you in his letters,and likewise of Mr Gouldings death, hee beingspectator, and tl1ererore needless to insert itt here, and of his charges in rebuildingsome small part of the factory,and whathee hath leftmee to build, which will cost26 slaves to compleat itl, and I have not wherewithallto pay for ill, but the Blacksare soecivilltostay till the nextshipcomes.Captain Parrislately arriv'd atWhidda,where in a short time gott his complement of slaves and departed the 20th of thisinstant, Jeaveing Mr Wyborne to settle a factory,and the said Mr Wyborne is now building a large house for the reception of interlopers. Captain Rickard departedhence the 12thNovember haveing gou his complement of slaves in 20 dayes for money and what goods hee brought with him, for I had not any goods to supply him with all but iron barrs, and they will not off here upon any account .31 Pray be pleased to send downe money to pay the souldiers their wages , for here is two which are 12 months behind and the other 6 months and myselfe likewise, for I want cloaths and other necessaries. The Phidalgoe would desire your Worship to send him a dram cup. [Inclosure] An acccoun t of what goods are fitt to purchase slaves att Ophra in Arda: Booges, all. sorts of brass bassons great and small , and sattin , all sorts of flowered and stripd silks, red cuttanees, ginghams, chercolees, sallampores, all sorts of lin .nen, longcloth , Holland, muslins, white baftes, pintados , chints, linnen printed, beads of all sorts, chiefly yallow, Jamon and greene, rangoes, cases of spiritts, brandy, musketts 200, powder 20 barrens , lead barrs 400 , what linnen you send lett it all be white. John Thorne. 480. John Thorne Ophra in Arda , 18 Dec . 1681 This comes with the accounts of Ophra and to certifie you how things are with us alt Arda, haveing no knowledge of men [sic -omission? ] a canoe goeing from Widdaw , by reason of the canoernen which went in her were those which came downe with Captain Lowe and they haveing soe plaid the rogue with him I durst not send any letters by them if I had known of her goeing , for fear of their mis .cariage. These accounts att Ophra may seeme something strange to your worship, if you had butt seen what condition I found the factory in and what bad customes factors had brought up here since I went home, not knowing how to deale with the Blacks, for they are a very encroching people to men that are strangers to their customes, and I have been forced to be att an extraordinary charge in reducing them to their former customes againe and I hope to continue itt whilst I have the power in my hands , but if your worship send another above mee I doe not know how hee will deale with them, for the Blacks will not lett any instructions to be given to a new Che ife but will make him condition with them before bee shall have any considerable discourse with the old Chei fe about their customes, but! hope the next account will be more easier to the Company then this, for the charge hath been ogmented in regard of an w1happy war which broke forth among the Blacks and I was forced to give 2 slaves for one barrell of powder for to secure the Companys concerns .32 IfMr Wyborne please , who is the bearer of this letter and accounts, hee can give you certifection att large.33 The same thing is by masters of ships as by a newfactor,for whenlheyhave the cargoe in Lheir owne disposeingthe Blacks willhave thingsatt their ownrate, knowingthat theyknownothing of the customesofthe country. I would desire your worshipto send boogesdowneby lhe firstoppertunilyforI have none for my present use but am forcl to borrowof the blacks, and theywillnot lend above50 lbs of booges for a slave and au the arrivallof a ship will have78 lbs for them, for I have not any goods that J can put off for boogesbut to greatloss. James Boydehumbly requestsof your worshippto send him your dischargeforhee iswillingto goe home,his Lime being expired.If youpleaseto sendhimhisdischargepraysend twohonestmendowne whichcan wright,forJohnWaterhouseis dead and shall have but two left which is not enough for this. PS. Here is a great man who desiresyour worshipto send hima drum and hee willsend you a slave for iu. [l nclosure I] Ophra in Arda, August I 68 I Warehouse debtor to several! goods of the Royal l Affrican Company's of England in thehands of mee John Thome Value in slaves 18th To 961 pound of boogcs alt 78 lbs per slave 0 12 To 4 slaves for the use of the factory 004To 12 old musketLSvallued all halfe a slave 000.To 32 lead barrs att 16 per slave 002To 3090 iron barrs all 12 per slave 257.20th left in my hand by Captain Branfill To 116 nicanees halfe of them damnified, they that weredamnificd were vallued att 9 per slave and the other were all 6 per slave 0 15To 96 red comiters vallued alt 10 per slave 009 6/io September the 12 left in my band by Captain Rickard To 9 iron barrs To one halfe piece damnified scarlett vallued alt one slave and a halfc 001.To 3 damnified allejars vallued att balfe a slave 000.The sum in slaves is 304!/z Per contra creditor August 1681 26th By I 00 lbs booges paid for Captain BranfiUs charges ofcarrying of goods from the waterside to the factory 00 1. By 4 slaves for 4 months dyau for myselfe 004By 3 slaves for 4 months dyatt for 3 wh ite men 003By 1 slave and a quarter paid to the watchmen and l.othe slaves in the house for dyatt 001. 30th By I slave in booges given to great mens servants 00 I By halfe a slave in booges paid for a man that was panyard carrying a letter for mee to Whidda 000. September 6th By 3 slaves in booges towards building the factory 003 I 8th By 3 slaves for getting me some part of my things from Whidda, the rest being lost 003 By 7 slaves in iron stole away when the factory was downe 007 November I 2th By 1 slave paid to a Docter for looking after sick men 001 14th By l slave in iron to buy oyle for the use of the house 001 }5th By 1 slave in committers given to the great men of the towne when I tooke tbe Companys concerns into my hand 001 December 4th  By 1 slave bought for the use of the factory  001  By l barrell of powder bought for the use of the house,  cost 2 slaves in niccanees  002  9th  By 24 niccanees sold for48 gallons of brandy for the use  of the factory for 4 months  004  I 2th  By 2 slaves in musketts bought for the use of the house  002  By halfe a slave in committe.rs given to the K:ing of Arcia  and to the King of Whidda when their people mett to make  peace with the Pbidolgoe (i.e. of Offra]  000.  036.  By ballancc of the gainsaid account remains in my hands, errors excepted 267. John Thome. [Inclosure 2] An account goods left in my hands by Captain Bramfill: 112 narrow niccanees, 12 ditto damnified, 96 red comitters 34 The goods which Captain Rickard left in my hands: halfe a peace of damnified scarlett, 9 iron barrs, 3 damnified allejars, 1 broken 7 hand canoe John Thorne Ophra in Arda 18 Aug. 1681 Received of Mr Cross for account of the Royall African Company these goods vizt.: 4 slaves, 961 lbs booges, 12 old musketts, 32 lead barrs, 3090 iron barrs. Testes John Thorne A ndrew Bramfill 481. PetlyWyborne Judeah a.liasWhidda, 8 Jan. 1681/2 The bearerYankyhalh beenhere some limeto come up tolhe Gold Coast withmee,butI not beingready and here being a blackscanoecomeing up Mr Thornesent to mee to send Yankey, which T now doe with your letters by her. Some small timesince I havebeen au Ophra,where I saw lhe Companysfactory and aconsiderableparcell of iron in itt but verylittleolhergoods.Slavesareto behad here if lhey thatwantsbringsgoods fitt fortheplace, as booges, brass,linnen, pintadoes, beads,etc.If itt lieth in my power to serve the Companyor yourselfc, there is nothing wantsbut yourcommands or oppertunity, and assure you I will faithfully. 482. John Thorne Ophra in Arda, 23 March 1681/2 I received your lelterper Mr Arthur Wendover,which orders my departure off thecoast for England.35 I wouldmost willinglyhavecompplied therewithcould those personsyou have sent downdischarged the debts I have bin forc't to contractwiththe blacks, for want of boogesor other goods to maintainethe factory,but till thatis complied with they will notlett me goe. l haveobeyedyour orders in deliveringan accoumto Mr John Winderof all the Royall Companyconcerns thathave beenin my charge, copies whereofI have sentto Capo Corsoe, andhave always endeav.oured to give advice of affaires here as well to the Agent and Councill as to mymastersinEngland.I am sure I have beenat great chargeandhave lost considerablysince I came downe last, by sollicitousdilligencein the Royall Company service,howeverI see myhonest endeavorshavebeen ill representedor not well accepted.WhenI was ordered fromWhidahto Ophrahby MrCrossI lost the greatestpart ofmy things to the vallue of 14slaves, lhey beingseized on by the King of Whidah, for noe other reason then my leaving his country, for the service of the RoyallCompany.I hope some considerationmay be allowedfor it, otherwise people willhavelittle encouragementto servethe Company.I likewise paid 2 slaves for a flagand staff, which never was put in my account. I am heartily sorryI am turned oulof my imploymentwithoul any reason given. I will obey your order as soone aspossible I can, which cannot be until the ballance of my account is sent downewhichI owe to the Blacksof this towne,havingborrowedit outof necessity.I much admire I could receive noe answer of my letters and accountswhich I understand were received at Capo Corso. It would have been a great satisfaction if I could receiveyour approvallof myaccounts, or otherwisewhatyou could objectagainstthem. Here is likewise 21 slaves due for building the house which must be paidbeforeI can goe off, having engaged to the blacksbefore they wouldundertaketo build. Mr Smith has been here and have seen the conveniency of it and is able to givebis oppinion of it. 483. John Winder Opbra in Arda, 23 March 1681/2 ThisaccompaniesMr John Smith,36 who will giveyou an accountof all transactions since our departure from Capo Corsoe CasUe,and in what condition the Royall Company affairesare atpresentupon thiscoast, which for want ofgoods is soe bad, that I know not how to maintaine myselfe and lhe rest of the Royall Company servants, finding noe goods in the possession of Mr Wendover (though falsely inform'd he bad broughta supply fromCapo Corsoe). By the approvallofMr Smith I came to Ophra, to take account of what goods was in this factory,where I found nonebut ironand asmall parcell of lead, which is soe great a drug that I cannot buy provisions with it but at great loss. Mr Thome upon my comeing shewed me his accounts to the 18thof December last, copies whereof he advised me were sent LO Capo Corsoe. I punctually discharged your commands in acquainting him with your orders for his departure off the coast, he express'd much willingness to be dischargedandtold mehe wouldgoe offin CaptainThomas Woodfine,as required, providedI could pay those Blacks the booges he had been forct to borrow of them for maintenanceof the factory,and himselfe his sallery,otherwise he could not gett away,the blacks being resolved to be satisfied beforebis departure, which having noe effects to doe, must be forc't to continue till the Agent and Councills further order. Mr Thorne hath made up his accounts to the 18thinstant, when he delivered lbe keys of the trunk into my possession, I being deLainedhere by the Phidalgoe, who is very sorry that the Royall Companyshould have anythoughts of settling at anotherplace, this haviJ)gbeen the residence for their people this many years, soe will not Jettme leave it, but hopes the Royall Company will alter their resolution and continue their trade with him.37My humble adviceis thatgoods may be speed.ily sent down,with a factor toremaine as secondto me, and thatboth this place and Guidah be continued, the one under the other. By examination I find that Mr Thomas Goulding died about the begining of May last. Mr Thorne being then at Guidah,he declares he knows nothing of his concernes, Mr Crosshaving taken Mr Gouldingsestate into his hands, whichwas lefl him as I understand by his last will. CaptainJohn Woodfine is ready tosaiJe,ofwhome I have demandedbills ofloading for his slaves, but he possitively denies to give any, having bought his Negroes himselfe.Captain ThomasWoodfine continues still at Guidah, in great distress for want of goods to purchase his complement of slaves. He hath several! times sent his boat co this place to offer gold forNegroes, the Dutchman have sent him some andpromises more,but at a very extravagantrate. I received your letterof the24thFebruary last per Captain Daniell Gates, who arrived at Guidah the 20th instant, Ishall comply with your orders in demanding bills of loading for his slaves, whenhe hath his complement, and proceed further as your letter directs. If he comeshither I shall doe my utmost endeavour forhis dispatch, otherwiseI shall be inca.pableof doeinghim anyservice.Mr Smithhas takenchargeof the hogsheadbrandysent from Capo Corsoe with me, which he will give an account of at his returne. Ishall alt all times endeavour to promote the interest of my masters, and doe hopethat you will think fitt to send downe supplies, that 1may have encouragementintheir service. [lnclosure 1) Goods proper and vendible at Arda booges long cloathes broad baftas and narrow white halfe baftaspauLkeys sletias fine and course and muslindiaper bag Holland sletia Holland, fustian and tufted Hollandallejars pintadoes all sonschinches [= chintzes] all sorLS ginghams chercolees all sons brass panns beads rangoes maniUoesbright,2 or 3 casque powder, IObarreUs musquetLS cases of spiritts brandy, a good commodity to sellprinted callicoes all sorts of silkes and sattins a good 9 hand canoe with paddles [lnclosure 2) Goods in the Royall Company factory at Ophra2796 barrs of iron 32 barrs of lead 23 musquetLS . a barrell of powder 1 brass kettle 1 iron poll 3 slaves for the use of the house 1 paire of slilliards John Winder [Inclosure 3] Ophra , January 18 1681 Warehouse debter to sundry goods of lhe Royall Affrican Company of England in the custody of me  John Thorne  24th  To 244 slaves & . of iron To 32 lead barrs vallued at 16 per slave 1manslave died that belongs to the factory 246.  244. 2  Royall African Company of Eng land debter to 13 slaves worth of booges to me, which I borrowed lo maintain the factory, whereof 1 slave of them was expended in November and 3. in December  13  Per contra creditor  Jan. 18 168 1/2  By I slave & 1/4 of iron sold for the monthly expence of the factory in brandy By ballance remaines  l '/4 245.  By 1 slave in booges for my own diett for a month By. of a slave for three whitemens diett for a month vizt. Robert Chapman, James Boyde , Andrew Crosby By. of a slave in booges paid to watchmen per month By. of a slave in booges for they in the house for victualls and cloathes  . . .  By ballance remaines in booges, 6. slaves  2.  Feb. 18 I 681/2  By 1 slave in booges for my own diett for a month By. of a slave in booges for Robert Chapmans diett for 1 month By. of a slave in booges for the watchmen per 1 month By 1/4 of a slave in booges for they in the house per month for victualls and cloathes By 1/4 of a slave in booges for Mr Winders diett per week  00 1/4 00 1/4 001/4 00.  By ballance remaines 4. slaves in booges  02  By 1 slave and. in iron barrs for the monthly expence of the factory in brandy  01'/4  By ballance remaines 244 1/4 [sic) of a slave in iron  Ophra Warehouse debt or to severa l! goods of the Royall Company ofMarch 18 England in the custody of me, John Thorne168 I/2 By 244. slaves in iron 244.The remaines of the booges that were borrowed 4V2 Per contra creditor By 6 slaves in iron paid towards building thefactory 06By I. slave in iron sold for brandy for the monthly expenceof the factory OI.By. of a slave in iron given to the canoemen that daythe Phidalgoe made bis custome 00. 7. By ball ance rema ines 236. slaves By 1 slave of booges paid for[?) the Phidalg oes yearly custome 001By I slave in booges given the same day to the Phidalgoes people 001By. of a slave in booge s in extrordinary expenccs whenMr Smith came here 00\/2By 1 slave in booges for rny own diett per month 001By 1 slave in booges for MrWinders diett 001By. of a slave for Roberl Chapmans diett 001/4By 1/io of a slave of booges for the slaves of the house 00 1/to 44/s By ballance of the againc said accompt remaines in the factory 2361/l[sic?] slaves in iron Witness my hand John Thome 484. Arthur Wendover Appa,38 17Jul y 1682 Youmay justly blame me and wonder at my bouldness for goeing to Appa in acanoe that belongs to Captain Wyborne, andalsoconclued twas on his account andinhis service. But I shall endeavour to make you sincible of the contrary,and giveyou an account of a more honourable a designe than you may or are aware of, andl doubt notmay if not neglectedprovevery advantagiousto my masters the RoyallCompany in whose service I am, and should be heartily glad and as willing asanyone to venture for their advantagemy person, as far as my life and health willpcrmitt me, under God etc. In January last past it was your pleasure to send me Cheife to Guidah on thecoast ofArda, anddid alsodeliver me a letterforMr RalphHassellCheife ofAccra,which it seemes was not delivered,39 upon which neglect your Worshipthought fillto withdrawme, andto that intentdid send MrJohn Smith, to placeMr John Winder in my stead, and me returne with Mr John Smith to Cape Coast per first oppertunity of the canoe, and also did order me to deliver whatt concernes I had of U1e Royall Company: which was soone done, for haveing nothing I could deliver nothing, but only 8 damaged barrells of powder which Captain Lawrance left, because Captain Wyborne would not buy them, those they had according to your Honours com.mands. This hard dealing is enough to breake the hearts of any one, and bath been almost tile breaking of mine in this case, and doubt not but your tllougbts are as mine, for a burnt child dreads the fire. I humbly beg your pardons, Gentlemen. The letter you are all very sincible that twas particularly about my own business, twas to order Mr Ralph Hassell to take the produce of what goods I had to dispose of tllere, for account of the Company, and although I did not deliver the Jetter, neither did I on tile other hand take the least thing to the vallue of one cracra, but left all as they were. There is neither Mr Hassell nor Mr Pley, nor any one can say I did, soe that hope this may in part give your Worship some satisfaction. I should not have doubted nor have had any feare in mee but would bave gladly delivered the letter, but having a knave to deale with all and the blanketts sticking in Mr Hassells throat,40 that I could scarce gett a word from him nor a good looke, nor victualls nor drinke, that I did expect no other, butt all the ill usualls imaginable as could be owne to a man, which was the reale cause and is the truth and notiling but the truth (as God shall helpe me). Now being put out of all imployments, and having notiling to doe but walking from place to place and spending my time in idleness, which life was a burtilen to me, and being often at Cricry [var. Guidah],41 for generally there was tile most company, always one Commander or another begging of Cap.tain Wyborne his assistance to furnish them witll slaves, for goods and gold, whoe always was ready to imbrace tlleir desires with his promises in great measure, and indeed to speake the truth was commonly as good as his word, being tilere I made a very neare inquiry into all matters; and understanding that there was a place to leward called Appa from whence he gotta great many slaves, some coming by land others by sea, made me admire that men should see their own goods goeing to this place and bring slaves for the produce, when tiley might as well tilemselves send their boats and purchase them tllemselves, for I believe if a canoe may goe a boat may doe the same (I am sure their ships wil I not faile them), but they doe soe deale on this place Guidah and Ophra that they thinke slaves are not to be hand past [var. below) these places. Then tllere is imother dependence, Captain Wyborne being there they cannot faile, wboe getting their goods into his hands makes his owne advantage, a benda a head the least price for all sorts, men, women, boys and girles. That men of reason and of understanding should see themselves soe bubled,42 I am sure tis much to the disadvantage of the Royall Company and owners, I shall instance in several particulars by and by. Seeing how causes went and nothing to do, I desired the favour of Captain Wyborne that I might goe to Appa per the next canoe, which he readily granted mee, telling me the canoe would returne in 10 days, which time I thought would not be long, and knowing that Mr Smith would not goe this month, I did adventure at which place I an1 now, of which I shall give you the following account and the great advantage that may be made on all accounts whatsoever. Appa is about 30 or 40 leagues at the most from Guidah and is very remarkab le for ships to find, there being a single cocarnutt tree standing in the middle of a small bay, and a flag staff by that one [= on] which they hang up an old clout, itt makes off to sea very woody for it is a woody place, but I shall advise the Phidalgoe to make a new St Georges flagg. The Phidalgoes towne is about 3 miles from the sea, which is incompassed round with water and small riverlett issuing from the great river, and is mightily full of ba[m]boo trees which afford wine much like unto palme wyne, of which baboos they build all their houses. There is also a very famous river that goes to Boneen,43 from whence comes all sorts of cloathes and are sold cheap for any sorts of goods. Boneen is 2 dayes journey from this place per land, all goods that comes to this place are conveyed to the Phidalgoes towne by water, they having canoes of 40, 50 and 60 foot in length. There is noe need of anyones taking care of goods when ashoare as to watch them, for the people are so just that they may be trusted with unsold gold, their honesty is to admiration, and the Phidalgoe takes all the care upon himselfe. Here is good conveniency of wooding and watering just by the seaside. These people never goe to sea in their canoes, for the river being soe large and affording very much fish as mullitts and there is one sort of fish that is large as a good handsome hoge, eats much like our sturgeon and is as good in my judge.ment, for that if any vessell intends for this place they must be prov ided with a canoe and men, which said canoe may returne fraighted with Boneen cloathes (and other sorts as tJ1e place can afford, which may be much to the advantage of tl1e Royall Company my masters. It is also the chiefest markett for slaves (or the fairo as the blacks call it),44 from whence me people of Guidah and Ophra are furnisht. Assinah voulgarly called Ardau Grandy45 and other ajacent places from whence comes most slaves are ajacent to this place, soe that slaves cannot be wanting and are not, and to be bought for a more reasonable rate then either at Guidah or Ophra; of rates shall give you an account how I have seen them bought. The Phidalgoe is very desirous of a trade and also the people. Once in 15 or 20 days you shall see the river full of canoes and like unto the River of Thames, some with slaves others with clouts, others with sheap, goats, henns, others with come etc. The Phidalgoe is a very good man, and lives in great splendour and much honoured by all his people -your trade is wholly with him and noe man elce, he takeing charge of all, soe the trouble is but small. The Cappusheers are a very good honest people, very labor ious alwayes, and for the Phidalgoe or else themselves, their business is cheife ly in building, which they doe very famously and very large houses, and as for the common people they seldome or never trouble you, for they come not within the Kin gs Court, but they are generally honest, which thing is a rarity amongst them: tis not soe at Guidah, them knaves are alwayes stealing and bringing troublesome palavoras to their King, which is not here. Goods bringing from the Appraye 46 very reasonably with abun.dance of care, and delivered safe into your house. As for the base exacting of custome as Lhe King of Guidah doth demand, I doe not as yett understand that they desire any, and I shall not make enquiry for feare of putting them in mind of such an evill habuit , but I doe believe the Phidalgo e doth expect something, and also the Cabbisheers, which will not be much . I can assure your Worship this that slaves are not wanting at this place, and could the Phidalgoe have any encouragement and his people they would make it their business to turne the trade. Also the people of Assimah or Uper Arda and several! neighbouring Phidalgoes have been with me, and beg heartily that ships may come, for it is soe far for them to go 1.0Guidah, and likewise they run I.he hazard of being panjard and robed of their goods and slaves (which are all very good reasons in my opinion). And as for the injuries done to the Royall Company, I shall instance in these particulars; Captain Thomas Woodfine, Commander of the Sarah Bonadve nture, sold the 3 peices of scarlett cloath to Captain Wyborne for 9 slaves, and also 3 pieces perpenuanoes and 1 piece of say for one, which 3 pieces of scarlett cloatb I saw sold for 22 by one Cocarham, a person that belongs to Captain Wyborne, and his [= is] brother Lo Hansco, a very honest fellow, and very willingly would be imployed in the Companys serice; and also Captain John [Woodfine] of the John Bonadventure and Daniell Gates, Com.mander of the Allapeen, sold sundry pieces of silks to Captain Wyborne, they being somewhat damaged, which the other person sold as followeth , 1 piece of yellow sarcinett slite and damaged containing 48 yards. for 5 slaves, one piece of green very slite containing 37 yards. for 4, one piece ofpinke colour and 1 piece cherry containing 37 yards for 5, one piece of skie sarcinett slite but a pleasant colour and good containing 39 yards . for 5, 1 piece of flowered colour and good containing 13[.] yards47 for 2 slaves-which goods at Guidah where blowne upon and slited as if they had cost nothing, nay upon the scarlett cloath the King spit upon it, for nae booges nae slaves, without you will pay the lwice the worth of them in othergoods . Tis otherwise here, for anything goes off, booges not coveted, but good richsilkes, and all sorts of linnins, noe one sort excepted as 1know of unless il be ironbarrs, and they shall not stick ahand, neither any other thing rather then not trade,the peop le are soe willing. And having now made you sincible of my goeing to Appa and upon whataccount, which was noe other then to see what manner of place it was and what sortof people, also if that the plac e were a place for trade or not, which were my cheiefeintentions, and noe othe r ends in the least but to make the strictest enquiry aspossibly I could, that I might be capable of givei ng account of a place that may soemuch to Lhe advantage of the Royall Company, which is the truth (as God will helpme), having given U1is accounl l sha ll leave it to your wise and prudent considera.tions and sha ll remaine here untill your furUler answer and make whal inspectionpossible I can into Uletrade; and accordingly shall act and doe as you advice. [PS] I must acquaint your worship that I have had two tedious fitts of sickness sincel have been here, which have much weakened me, but I thank God am very wellrecovered, and in a good way to gaine my strength againe. The Phidalgoe was mydocter, for every day he makes me one thing or another to take, but what it was Ican never lell, also water to gargal in my mouth, and would alwayes see me takethem before he would goe . rn perusal! of yours by Mr John Smith I understand thatMr Ralph Hassell should say that the oath which I did take upon the account of theblanketts that I was forced to doe the same, but I must be so bo ld with him as to tellhim that he is a base knave and a most horrible notorious Iyer, for all the time thatI was at Accra last I scarce changed one word with him, for he would not speake to me. And likewise Mr Pley doth confi rme the same, be knowes to the contrary, butI pilty him, he dirst doe nae other wayes. For Mr Hassells part tis like him, tis the real effects of his heart and minds, also his maxims of advice to all to deny itt and confirme it with oaths, but 1would have Mr Hassell to know that I understand myselfe better then to be made a knight of the past, or to be forced to sweare upon anyaccount whatsoever. He may sweare by the eternal! God if that he pleaseth, he never bought any blanketts from Captain John How, and Mr Pley may also sweare he never had them in possession. According lo the the oath that I did take, which I didvoluntarily , I say that Ralph Hassell Chiefe of Accra did buy from Captain John How I 02 blanketts au 3a per blankett, whoe lay at anchor off Lague, Olis was the 2nd day of Octob er ([ 16]81), and brought them ashoar e and pul them into thewarehouse in Accra fort;48 which is truth as God shall help and the whole truth etc.Being at anchor at Wyamba Caplain John How came aboard Captain ThomasWoodfine49 and saluted me per Ole salutation of informer, for Mr Hassell had acquainted him how squares had gone; and I suppose delivered the blanketts back againe, for he told me that he was fully satisfied. Accounts of the rates I have seen paid for slaves at this place ApP.a Silks, 1 piece yellow, damaged, containing 48 yards . for 5 slaves; 1 piece greene contain ing 37. yards50 for 4 slaves; l piece of pink and 1 piece cherry, damaged, containing 37 yards for 4 slaves; 1 piece of good slite skye containing 39 yards. for 5 slaves; one piece flowred ditto, good , containing 13 yards. for 2 slaves. All sorts of silks sell well here, especially those that are very rich and gaudy. Sundry other sorts of goods vizt a piece of finesca:rlett cloth, 7 slaves; 12 iron barrs, l ditto; 3 cases of spiritts, 1 ditto; 2 red perpettuanos 1 ditto; 3 fine India carpetts, ditto; 6 narrow pintadoes, ditto; 4 silke allejars ditto; 12 small baftas, ditto; 4 chints, ditto. These goods I have seen bartered for slaves per Cockro and for the rates above mentioned , butt for the rates of others J cannot tell as yett, but doe presume to be all one, nay and rather cheaper, for good goods they covett much, gaudy and rich, although anything is vendible here , rather than want a trade the people are so desireous . I doe believe that Welch plaines would sell well here, by reason they make all their rich cloathes of them,51 soe that care must be had to u-ie severall sorts of colours, red, green, yellow, blew, purple and orange, and the Phidalg oe gave me a cl oath made of Welch pl aine which is very handsome. [PPS) I had neither inke nor paper but only this one sheet per chance, and am forced to write with gunpowder steeped in water, soe desire to be excused for this foule page[ ?). At the request of the Phidalgoe he desires me to write for the several! particu .lars as followeth -fine linnins of all sorts, as fine sletia:s, fine muslings, also beads of all sorts, small and great. 1 saw sold an head of beads of an gold color, transpar.ent, large the size of a white pea, this bought 1 slave. With beads, the small ones, they adorn their cloaths and make capps in the shape of a sugar loaf and adorne them as thicke as possibly they can in sundry pretty formes, which show very glorious. Your atlas silke are desired, also booges, which doe encourage much. 485. Andrew Crosbie [to Royal African Company in England) Guydah, l [sic) Sept. 168252 Whereas Mr John Winder, your honours cheife factor for this coast, was upon the 15th of this instant September pan yard by the Blacks in order to his being sent home in the ship Thomas and William, lhe reasons whereof shall in short give yourhonour s and thereby endeavour to cleare myself of those asperlions hee already hasor may further cast upon mee. Firstly: All his first comeing here from Ophra to this place, not well consider.ing the interest of your Honours in study ing and consulting the humours and dis.positions of these people, whoc will neither be slighted by a high and lofty carridgeor abused by bad language, in both of which gave too much liberty to his selfe, bywhich hee hath for ever lost the love and good will of these people, although thebreach for the present be seemingly made up, there being not one upon the placefrom the King to the poorest can afford or give him a good word.2ndly: By his becomeing debtor to one Captaine Bebc 53 for 15 slaves whichwas a long time before paid and then not to his [= Bebe's] satisfaction, I doepresume might be a great part (and by the disgust the blacks had before takenagainst him) of his being panyard, and for whatt hec may possibly say of my selfebeing concerned therein, ill was soe farr from mee that when heard itt [IJ didendeavour and partly effected the composeing of the business, and now must giveyour Honours an accompt of his suspistious asperscons cast upon mee. For sometime past your honours factory here lead voy'd, in which lime did give the utmostof my assistance to all masters of ships in your Honours service, by which rneaneswas gratified by one and the other to the vallue of7 or 8 bendy's, possibly more, 7whereof lent to Mr Winder, for which received his noate to be paid mee againe, butsome time after when hee had my money in possession told mee hee had seazed ittfor your Honours account, which seemed more then unkind, of which doe leaveyour honours judge. Seeing hee was like to leave the place [I] did tell him if mighthave my monyes [I] would trye and endeavour to compose his business, which didendeavour and partly by my meanes itl was effected, and to what other callamnyshee may loade mee with, as seeing interlopers and the like, I doe here declare thecontrary, but can bring with good proofe the same thing upon himselfe, whicbhereunder in short shall give your Honours an account of in three articles.1st. Upon the 14th day of August past, here being in port an interloper calledLblank], one Fullwood Commander, whoe wanting some assistance, Captain Wy.borne not being here, Mr Winder did him what kindness lay in his power, by firstof all in paying his customes to the King , which was paid out of your Honourswarehouse in 9 lb of boogees and 9 yards of silke, which contracted the familliaritybetwixt them (things not here going to his satisfaction), that bee agreed to put 40slaves on board of him and soc leave your honours factory here, 8 of which was puton board, in which time Captain North came in hither with some goods for yourhonours account [and] the business was made up and declined.2ndly. Captain Shepheard here leaveing some few remain es of boogcs, the said Mr Winder caused them to be carryed to Capta in Wyborns to serve and for the use of interlopers. 3rdly. Upon the 17th instant I doe know and can attest hee served and supplyed a Portugueze vessell with 6 slaves, notwithstanding your honours ship in port, which is all alt present I shall trouble your honours with, notwithstand ing could attest and averr several I things more. 486. Andrew Crosbie (to Agent & Council at Cape Coast Castle) Guydah, 1 [sic) Sept. 168254 I humbly presume tO offer to your serious view and judgements the foregoing copie sent to the Company by Captain North, as well for my owne justification as for endeavouring the prevention of the ruine of the interest of their honours here in this place by Mr Winder, whoe never from the first day hee came hither tooke the right way or course lO preserve itt, by his alwayes quarrelling and not agreeing with the natives here, since which hee hath acted many more ill things to the prejudice of the Company, as Mr Armitage if hee please can testify of, as enticeing away Captain Norths man,55 not to serve the Companys interest but his owne, for that Mr Winder tould me that expected a New Eng land man here and did designe to put on board some slaves of her and send him along with lhem . And then his carrying out the Companys goods in the night to Captain Wybornes house, trucking of them away for gold and cloaths to the ruine and prejudice of the trade here by selling au and under rate, only for to gctl gold to have carryed him off, with many more ill U1ings of the like nature, and for whatsoever hee may impeach mee of I durst refer myselfe to your Worship or any person here that is concem'd in the Companys service. The grounds of his disgust and hatred your Worship may perceive by mine to the Company. Nol else, but as have soe shall still faithfully endeavour the full discharg.ing of my duty, and the obeying in all things Mr Armitages commands. 487. Timothy Armitage [to Royal African Company in England] Guydah, 24 Oct. 1682 In my last bearing date the 26th past per Captain North gave your Honours an account of the then present need full, and did hope by this conveyance might have given your Honours a satisfactory account of the well settlement of this your factory, which doe now find will never be effected as long as Mr Winder tarry's upon this place,his humour not suiting with the nature and disposition of the blacks here, whoe has noe love or kindness in the least for him. They have since my last lo your Honours endeavoured a second time sending him off, by pigniaring of him with a possitive resolution thal hee shall nol remaine upon this place. The reasonsof their disgusl against him I have endeavoured as nigh as possible to gather fromthem, which goes here inclosed, the most part of which I musl assert the verritythereof, ascan likewise Captain Ambrose and Mr Thomson, 56 both whome as wenasmyselfe have endeavoured to secure your honours interest by counselling of himupon a consultation together held the 21st instant to cause those goods that werecarried down to Captain Wybornes in the night time out of your honours warehouseto be brought up againe, and to apply himselfe to the Agent and Councill at CaboCorsoe, by takeing the oppertunity of a canoe now going thither, to both which bewould not agree nor assent, bul has and does endeavour to convert the said goodsinto gold to your honours prejudice, pretending your honours are more indebted tohim, as your honours may perceive by the inclosed account, which hee gave meeto send home to your honours when [be) thought to have gott his passageupon oneof these two ships now in port, vizt the Goulden Fortune and the George.57 I haveas bounden drawne up some objections against his said account, which togethergoeshere inclosed for your Honours better government. I am sorry should have soejust occasion and soe bad a subject to enlarge upon, and soe soone contradict mylast, but shall as soone as may be dispatch away the canoe to the Agent and Coun.cill, whose further orders shall here attend; and shall per Captain Ware give yourhonours a more full account. [In clo sure I) Hereunder follow the reasons of the disgust the Blacks has taken against Mr Win.der, vizt. I st When be first came to settle amongst them his bad language and carriage suitednot their hum ours, which occasioned a small breach.2ndly. Upon which he left their towne and the Companys factory and tooke up bisaboade for some time att Captain Wybornes house, whome they knew was notconcern'd in the Companys business, which created in them a great dislike to him,they being naturally covetous of trade.3rdly. His endeavouring to gett into their debts, and actually running into oneCaptain Bibbees debts, when afterward they understood hee did it with a designeto goe off with one Fullw ood, an interloper then in port, to which end hee hadactually put aboard 8, and laid under an obligation to make itt up 40 slaves.4thly. His cutting of sletias and lessening the bunches of beads, which they looke upon as an absolute cheate Lotheir country. 5thly. His carrying of goods out of the factory in lhe night time to the Lower Towne and to Captain Wyborne's house,s8 which soe far as I can perceive have been the cause that have soe much insenced them against him. In Guydah the 19th October 1682 Tunolhy Armitage [Jnclosure 2) 1682 Royall Affrican Company debtors lbs Slaves July To accouat of booges paid for 16 gallons brandy 90 To paid the cost of 6 hamacks 100 To paid account of sending to Ophra upon severall pallavoras 125 To petty charges for this month 75 August To paid for entertaining Captain Attwell etc. people 90 To my owne dicu for the months of July and August 225 To petty charges for this month 115 September To expended on account of Captain Norths people 90 To paid for iron worke for the factory 200 To mine and Mr Armitages dictt this month 180 To petty charges for this month 205 October To mine and Mr A.rmitagesdyett this month 180 To petty charges for the same month 031 l.bs 1706 18.861b July 9 To given the King upon account of building the 2:.factory, in silke September 16 To more paid the King and Cabasheers when was 2:-pigniard, in silke To brandy 77 gallons expended in the months of July, August September 4: 13gal To more paid the King and Cabbas heers when was pigniard, 2:.in beads October 24 To 10 white long cloths paid for 450 lb booges for the use of the factory 6213 To paid the King and Cabasheers in part for building the house 5:.To more paid on account of the same 4:.To paid several! carpenters on account of worke done in the factory 2:.To 5 white long cloths paid Andrew Crosbie his wages for6 month s to the 8th instant To paid Francis Caple his wages for the sameTo delivered Captain Ambrose IOblew long cloths and8 fine sletias To paid Captain Bibbee for his assistance in the RoyallCompanys service 1:.To my owne saUary from the 29th January 10 the 29th instant,which is 9 months an 3 slaves per month 27:.To my dyeu for 5 months at Ophra and expence of brandy 10:.To expence of brandy for this month L:__slaves 1002/3 1682 Per contra is creditorJuly 9 By booges received from Captain Shepheard 1100lbsSeptember 24 By ditto exchanged for I9 white long cloaths 45027 By ditto received from Capta in North 156 1706 Slaves 18.861b July 9 By silke rece ived from Captain Shepheard, 62 yardsSept27 By ditto received from Captain No1th, 203 yards } 13. Ju ly 9 By 21 pintado's, all broken, received fromCap tain Shepheard 2:-Septembe r 24 By 25 ditto narrow received from Cabo Corsoe 31/sJuly 9 By 7 sletias, damnified, from Captain Shepheard 1:.Aug 27 By 60 peeces ditto received from Cabo Corsoe 20:.July 11 By 16 gallons brandy as per contraAug 27 By more 61 gallons received from CaboCorsoe 3:1:-13galBy 559 pounds of beads received from Cabo Corsoe 14:.Sept 24 By 25 peeces of white long cloaths 162hBy 50 peeces herba longees Received from 71/7By 25 silke ditto Capo Corsoe 3417By 25 chercolees att 5 per slave by ship George 5:.By 25 strip'd si\kes 5:.By 25 gingham s 6.September 27 By 31 blew long cloths from Captain North IQl!JBy 31 iron barrs from ditto 2:.By 980 rangoes, white sma ll and broken, from ditto i.:_ Slaves 1332/7 In Guydah 19th October 1682 [Inclosure 3] Objections to Mr Winder's accountunder date of 19th Octobersent home to theRoyallAffricanCompany his charge co the Company lbsJuly 6 hammacks charg'd att lbsObjections booges 100 sending to Ophra etc., 3 hammacks costing booges 21 booges 125 petty charges for this month 75 not expended more then 10 entertaining Captain Attwdl s I can say little to people 90 Aug. petty charges this month 115 I can say little to entertaining Captain Norths I can say little to people iron worke for the factory 200 I can say little to Sept. petty charges for this month I 15 not expended more tl1en 6 Oct. more for this month --1! I can say little to Booges lbs 1036 can say little to Slaves alt 90 lbs booges per slave is 11 . Slaves To the King upon account of the house, in silke 2 nothing paid upon said account to the King and Cabasheers when was pigniard. in beads 2 nothing paid upon said account to given the King when was pigniard, in silke 2 nothing paid upon said account only 12 yards of silke given the King for a datig [= dashey} To 9 slaves paid acount of the ~ UH 9 of which only 7 slaves is paid ToAndrews and Franks wages for 6 months 7 not yett paid to my dyett etc. alt Ophra for not paid as bee having left your honours in 5 months 10 debt att Ophra To carpenters workc in the IO not paid more then I ounce of goldfactory To his sallary, 3 slaves per month to be paid here 27 I can say little to Slaves 73. In Guydah the 22d October 1682 Tunothy Armitage 488. Timothy Armitage [to Royal African Company in England] Guydah, 28 Oct. 1682 The foregoing is coppy of my last per Captain Ambrose, which doe confirme and should herein have sent your honours copie of the within menl.ioned, but that was hindred by Captain Wares sudden departure, occasioned by the non setlement ofyourhonoursaffaireshere, which nowdoehope in someshorttimemay beput intosome better posture, Mr Winder haveing delivered to mee what remaincsof goodsin your honours warehouse, which is verry inconsiderable, as your honours willperceive by the inclosed account taken, the which have passed to your honourscreditt, as shall likewise doe all the goods consignáctor left here. Mr Winder de.sign'ct to have come home in Captain Ware, now upon departure, but that heeabsolutelyrefus'd to take him in, the reasons whereofhe will give your honours.Idoe hope mayperswade Mr Winderto goe for Cabo Corsoe,in which shalluse theutmost of my endeavour,and as oppertunity presents keepeyour honours advised.Since mineper Captain North, which gave your honoursanaccount of what goodsmostin demand,here is noe alteration.And as for a further accounthow things hasbeenhere manag'd,doereferr yourhonourstO CaptainWare,CaptainAmbrose andMr Thomson. I hope in 2 or 3 day's to send away the canoe to Cabo Corsoe to theAgent and Councill, to whome shall give the needfull,assureingyour honours thatas far as in mee ly's nothing shall be wanting for the promoteingof your honoursinterest. [InclosureJIn Guydah the 24th October 1682 Received fromMr John Winder upon account of the RoyallAffrican Company ofEngland vizt 12 narrow pintado's2 white long cloat.bs11halfe pieces blew ditto13herba longees, damnified by the worms18yards of flowredsilke23 three yards plaine ditto2 chests beads containing 345 poundsrangoes, white and small, 1260 rangoes more 900, broken, white and small per TimothyArmitage Slaves standing out, which were acknowledgedbefore the King and assured to bepaid au the arrivall of the next Companys ship, 15 489. TimothyArmitage [toAgent and Council, Cape CoastCastle) Guydah, 28 Oct. 1682 My last was under date of the 27th past.59 copie whereofmust here omitt in regardof the shortness of time that at present offers, occasioned by a great differance betwixtMr Winderand theBlacks here, as yourWorship mayperceiveby theabove copie and inclosedsent home to the Company by Captain Ambrose,there being no reconciling of itt; since which hee bas delivered what goods remaining in the warehouse (although very inconsiderable) into my custody, which shall be dis.posed of to the most advantage of the Royall Company, an account whereof goes here inclosed. Hee would willingly have gon off in Captain Ambrose or Captain Ware, but neitherof themwould receivehim, itl being our gcnerall advice that hee should apply himself to your Worship andCouncill, causing the goods hee carried out of the factory in the night time to be brought in againe, which hee will not be perswaded to, but supose bee will take the next oppertunity to goe off. Shall en.deavour as much as in mee Jy's to maintaine the Companys honour and interest, although hee has left mee very little to doe it with, as your Worship will perceive, and ingoodsthat will not readily vend. Thjs comes via St Thomaper CaptainWare, whoehas thisday gotl his complement of Negroes aboard if not more, haveing left behinde him only 21 iron barrs in the factory.I have obeyed your Worships order in requiring bills of loading from them, but ill is refus'd by all. To prevent the Companysgoods from being made use ofl doc humbly offer my opinion that your Worshipsend down copie of their invoycesof what goods aboard of them for the purchaseing their complement of Negro's, by which shall be able to make some computation; for that if they have any remains they will rather sell them for gold then leave them in the factory for the Companys use, as Mr Bathurst in Captain North did, whoe sold upwardsof 500weight of booges, cutt the Companys sletias, sold several!remnants amounting to 11 peeces to Mr Winder, whoe will not denie itt, by which the trade is almostruin'd. In 2 or 3 days hope shalldispatch thecanoe, by whichshall give your Worshipa more large account how thingsgoe here. In the meanetimehumblycrave furtherorders for the settleing of thisplace, which in time mayprove a place of as great consequenceas any place upon t11ecoast of Guyney. Doe likewisecrave positive orders for the putting of any slaves aboard any ship or ships, and the quantity. 490. TimothyArmitage Guydah, 5 Dec. 1682 Inclosed goes copie of my last via St Thoma per Captain Ware, who departed this place thee 3rd instant, although had all his Negro's aboard the 28th past and upon tlleesame day tookhis leave of this our towne, alt110ughtarryed below att Captain Wybomes severall day's, which with his leaving behind but 21 iron barrs in the factory creates tlle suspition in mee of his haveing many more slaves aboard then his complement,for that Mr Thomson whoe acted and did all the business in the buying the slaves, upon tlle 28th instant told mee tllat tllen they had their full complement, when that I was assuredhee had not disposed of in silke more then 2 slaves, and what became of the rest l leave your Worship to judge, as likewise a parcel! of corrall and some muzlins which were not here disposed of. As not seeinglheir invoyces could not make any computation, but tooke notice of what goodsthey had, an account whereof goes here inclosed, with their prize how disposed of,by which your Worship may see whether they have done the Company right or not.I doe not remember that did see any other sons of goods but what is here specified.The wrong Mr Bathurst did the Company in selling their booges for gold, cuttingtheir sletias, have in mine of the 28th October past given your Worship an accountof, copie whereof goes here inclosed, as likewise copie of last to England with MrWinders account etc., whoe (although much against his will, haveing endeavour edhis passage upon all ships that has bin her, as well interlopers as Companys ships)comes in the canoe, whome I safely wish with your Worship. What goods he t0okeout of the factory in lhe night time hee has disposed them the major part for gold,and the rest for cloaths, with an intention to have seen England before Cabo Corsoe,although now prevented. I must need s acquaint your Worship that many day'sbefore l arrived here in Captain North that hee had contracted with one Fullwood,an interloper, to have put aboard 40 slaves, and to have went wilh them himsclfe toBarbado's, whereof I am sencible that 8 of them was actually put aboard . Togetherwith Mr Winder comes one Daniell Roe whoe left and ran away from CaptainNorth, whome Mr Winder has entertained ever since; his designe in ill (I aminform'd, if lhings here went according to his expectation) was in some short limeto have sent him away with slaves for New England in a New England man heeexpected downe here , of which as bounden thought myselfe obliged to give yourWorship an account, leaving the sequell of all things to your Worships prudence. Ihave likewise sent you up in the canoe one Patrick Welch, whome f understand ranaway from the Castle LOthe prejudice of the Companys interest , hee was broughthither by one Wood, an interloper, and putt aboard of one Wilcocks now in port,whoe turned him here ashoare upon some di fferance happening.I did hope, asyour Worship may perceive by the inclosed copies, might have sent you up thecanoe before this, but that the canoemen did evade ill by the no11properness of theseason of lhe yeare/' 0 witb the like excuses, and have been forced to furnishe themin order LOtheir dispatches as au bottom, of which your Worship may please to takenoate. I now question not in the least, but that the Companys affaires here will bein a mighty good posture and condition , and hope towards the maintaining of whichyour Worship will consider a fresh supply, Mr Winder haveing left nothing behindhim that will all present purchase victualls, al1U1oughhave and shall ever endeavourthe maintaining the Companys, their rights, honour and privilidge here, and the truedischarging of those bonds and obligations under which 1lay, which hope time mayveryfie. As to the removing Captain Wyborne in complyance to your order, I see notbow myselfeor anyolherin lheCompanysservicecan effectit, soe longas lhe companys shipsdoe maintaineand uphold himand supplyhimwithguns, all sons of ammunition,with other materialls,as CaptainWarehas latlydon. I have wrote to Mr Thorne several!limes but as yell can gett noe account from him of what numberofbarrs remainein lhefactory,allhoughhee writesmee word is willingto goe off andshall, if can geu leaveof lhe King, sendAndrewCrosbiethilherto take an accountand endeavourtheirdisposallfor theCompanysuse.What goods most indemandyourWorshipwill findalt foothereof, for whichgoodsslavescan never bewanting,althoughthere shouldcome downeneversoc manyships,andquestion notbut in a verryshort time this place may prove of verrygreat importanceto the Company.And if they should altogetherquill Ophra,this place is sufficient for to slaveall theirships,for thattheydoe and must sendtheirslaves from Ophrahither, and that if yourWorshipand Councillthought in convenientand approvedthereof here mightbe alway's in bank 100slaves to supply upon any occasion any of the Companysshipsaccordingto your order and directions,whichpresumeyourWor.ship will finditt in timemuch to the Companysinterest. [PS) May itt please your Worship, there is great occasion of brandy here in the factory. [InclosurcI) CaptainNorthscanoe is debtor Tooyle . of a slave Toboogesfor sayles 10lb Tocankymonyand wood IO lb booges To a rope fora grapline CaptainWarescanoe is debtor To oyle . of a slave Tocankymonyand wood IO lb booges [Goodsvendible) booges sletias white longcloths white andgreen beads aJlejars pintado's,whiteground rangoes,largeand red red corral!,long beads silke longees callico's,with all sorts of white ordinarylining [lnclosure2) Accompt of the prizes of goods for which Captain Ware disposedhis cargoe asfollowethviztcbinseys,4 peecesper slavefinemuzlines,2 peeces per slave allejars,4 peeces per slavepintado's broad, 5 peeces per slavefine sletias,3 peeces per slavecourse ditto,2 peeces per dilto61 herba longees,8 per slavesilke ditto, 7 per slaveiron barrs, No. 16per slavebeads,40 lb per slaverangos,200 per slavewhite andblew longcloaths, I. per slavesilke,price uncertaine, from 15to 20 yardsper slaveIn Guydahthe 5th December 1682 491 . PellyWyborne Guydah,8 Dec. 1682 I received a letter from your Honour andCouncilldated the 12thof September.AsforCaptainParrisIeaveingmeheare,62 ill was becauseI wouldnot goe furtherwithhim. For the RoyallCompanys service,I respect ill as I oughtto doe. I have had aletter by Captain Price from my brother Wyborne,63 in which I understand theCompanyhathspoke to him to writeto mee to serve themand thathee is intreatingthemaboutmy formerlosses,of which I expect tohearefartherby the firstandt11enshallbe able to giveyou a bettersatisfaction.Howevermy concernsare toogreatehere to leavethisplace untill Igoe off the coast. If yourhonourand Councill thinkmee fill to serve tlle Company here or au Ophra and allow mee assistance,I willendeavour to sett theire affairs in a right posture and render a just accompt,or ifyou doe notthink fitt to intrustmee if you are pleasedto send an honestingeniousman that will heare my advice, I wiUbe as faithful] to him as I wouldbe to mybrother, andbe asjust to the Companysinterestas if Ireceivedtheirpay. I beseechyoubepleasedto belceveme, as I amuponmy owne accounthere soeI doeall tllatI can for the good of trade, and if I doe well for my selfe I must doe well for theCompany.For your being my enemies ill would trouble rneeverry mucb if I de.served itt, but if itt be as I am to tlleCompanys interest I shall be tllankfullto you,for I am sureI havedone themmore true servicethenhath been don to themsince I came here by all Lheirservants besides. ILwould not become mee to wright the least ill of any of the Companys servants, but to see tlleir trade and our country's credilL.that mought be soe great here, abused by home mad,64 brandy mad, boy mad, treacherousandfoolemad men,hath made mee ashamedand troubled some.times-treacherousbybribing the blacksLOquarrell with their fellowservantsand turne them out to geu themselves into their places, by insnareing one another inlO ill actions and then wrighting against them, by informing the blacks of the vallue of goods againsttheir mastersand all other peoples interestthat trades. Here is one Crosbie, whoe tlle people would have sent away from this country severall limes before Mr Winder came downe, but I would not suffer them, and since by his informingthe blacksof whatyour factors or masters of ships doe or say, and alsoe informing in trade,thathee is in such favourthat Mr Windertold meethat he would verry willinglyhave him up to Capo Corsoe withhim, but hee beleevedthe people would not let him goe.Mr Armitage pretends that hee desires verry much that hee could send him, but when I bad spoke to the Blacks and they had consented if Mr Armitage and Mr Winder would desire in, Mr Armitage then told Mr Winder that hee could not send him yett, but hee would in a short time. I doe verryly beleeve Mr Armitage hadratherMr Winderhad runoff fromthecoast then LOCaboCorsoe, this fellowwas verryhelpfull in getting Mr Winder out of his place. Pray beleeve I had rather see the Companys interestgoe forward then any other nation. 492. John Thorne Ophra in Arda, 28 Jan. 1682/365 February the 12th 1681/2Mr John Winder in the night came to Ophra and the next morning showed me your Worships order, the which I most willingly complyed with, and he forthwithdesired that the Phidalgoe mighthave notice ofit, that your Worshipand Gentlemenof the Councill had U10ughtfitt to make him Chiefe factor on the Coast of Arda, and (he] desir'd he might have bis residence here at Ophra and to be secured, otherwise Mr John Smith would have him to Guidah, he [= Smith] being the only man he was to suspect, as haveing notice of it before from Mr Spurvay.A letter of the 14thcame to Mr John Winder from the said Mr John Smith to desire Mr Winder to looke after the debts which is owing to the Royall Company,unto whomeI gave a particular account of all. The 22nd came another letter fromMr John Smith to Mr Winderintemating that Captain ThomasWoodfine had altered his mind and was resolved to take in his complement of slaves at Guidah, and wished Mr Winder to neglect noe lime but come away as soon as possible mightbe.Mr Winderhaving received this letter makes all the meanesthat might be to the Phidalgoe, telling him that Mr Smith had sent for him to Guidah with an intentto withdrawthis factory, and therefore desired he might beprotected byhim, which being granted by lhe PhidalgoeMr Winder then writes to Mr Smilhlhat he was retain'd by the Phidalgoe and could not possibly come to Guidah. MrSmith sent severall letters to him to come to Guidah and at last came himself, butwas forcedto goe back without him. I asked the reason of his being soe unwillingto goe with Mr Smith, he told me Mr Smithhad a mind to keepehim at Guidah andcome to settle herehimselfe, and that he had receivedseverallabuses by whitemenatt Guidah a11dheld il not a place fttt for a factory, in regard theyhad soe raised theprices of slaves to 25 per cent dearer then they are at Ophra.66 Mr Smith notsatisffiedwith Mr Winders staying at Ophra, lhinking the Phidalgoe had kept himby forcecontrary to his owne will, wasresolvedto fetchhim away in the night, thewhichresolution he put into practice and came to Ophra in the night with a sparehammack and men arm'd, and being without sent Francis Capell to the factory toacquaintMr Winder with his designe, anddesired Mr Winder to come to him withall speed.Mr Winder haveing receivedthis messagewentalongwithFrancis Capetlto Mr Smith, and as he went acquaintedsome of the Phidalgoes people which layatthegate (asthey doe every night)thatMr Smithwascometo fetchhim to Guidah.This notice beinggiven the townewas soone up in arms, whichMr Smith found tohls cost, and seeing he could not gett Mr Winder away return'd to Guidah againeand began comake preparation to goe to Cape Coast, which after some time pro.ceeded on his voyage. He being gone Captain Shepheard arrived about the 20th ofJune in Guidah Road, and goeing on shoarc there was forc't to send for his goods,for the Blacks would not suffer him to goe on board againebefore he had began totrade with them. Captain Shepheard then sent Mr Winder your Worships letters,which haveing received [Winder] sent Robert Chapman in a canoe on board to desire Captain Shepheard to bring his ship into Ophra road, where he would beready to dochim all the servicehe could asper order fromyour Worship,but wherehe was he could not assist him in any thing, besides if he could come might do theRoyall Company great service in it, forhere was 30 slaves owing to the Companywhich would be shipt on boardhim, or if his goods should fallshortmight be madegood byiron barrs, which with his other goods would be put off and not otherwise,but Captain Shepheard being on shoare beforeMr Winders letters came could notcomply with his desires, but writthim a Jetterand sent it by Robert Chapman whowas then on board that in regard he could not comply with what Mr Winder hadwrite him of, nevertheless he would send him his remaines to Ophra if he wouldsend the said Robert Chapman for them, and withall order him to give a receipt forwhat he received, and it would be as well as if he had did it himselfe. Mr Winderhaveingreceived Captain Shepheardsletter waswillingto goe on boardof hfm, and desired me to speake lo lhe Phidalgoe for him, but when the Phidalgoe heard he wouldgoe on board a ship in Guidah road began to be doubtfull of his returne and refer'd his answer till another lime, but Mr Winder being urgent wilh the Phidalgoe made him the more distrustfull of his comeing againe, which l told Mr Winder of but he LOldme that if I could gell leave of the Phidalgoe for him, he would become bound to me in a 200 pound bond,67and likewise would give the Phidalgoe 60 slaves, that is the 30 that he owes the Royall Company and 30 more in iron, if he returned not againe but went Oil shoare at Guidah. On these considerations the Phidalgoe granted leave with my engagemenLtogether. He went Oil board and haveingbeen on board 2 dayes but the King of Guidah heard of it, and told Captain Shepheardifhe wouldbringhim on shoarehe would givehim a slave forhis pain es, the which Captain Shepheardsoone put into practice and gott him on shoare, to the great loss of the Royall Company,for as soone as this Pbidalgoe heard of it he sent for his 30 slaves in iron, which I kept him from for severalI months and told him did believeMr Winder would come againe, and had kept them yet in the factory had not Mr Armitage sold 500 bars to the French Merchant68 and he comeing to demand them the Phidalgoe said he would be paid first the 30 slaves due to him which Mr Winder contracted, and soc forc't me to pay the 30 slaves in iron. He being paid I refused to give the French Merchant the barrs Mr Armitage had sold him till further order from your Worship. I often desired Mr Winder to take some care for my departure from this place buthe put me of from time to time, and told me would waite yourWorships further order,he not findingme guilty of any thing of what was laid to my charge. The letter that came to your Worship in Andrew Crosbies name is false, he denyes it and saith he never writ any. Mr Smith and Mr Winder both questioned him about it and had his answer. When Mr Winder was gott to Guidah I often moved my willingness to be discharged and to goe home according to your Worships order. I also desired him to take some care to send booges downc to maintaine the factory,[he] have[ing] then soe many in his hands, and not let the Companys barrs be sold at soe pi ti full a price as 3 lbs of boogesper barr,69 butneitherMrWindernor Mr Armitage would give me a:nyansweare to what I wrill, thoughseverall desired, and might have had my passage in a Dutch ship if it had not been both thcire neglects. I have been ever willing your Worships orders should be obeyed in things soe far as ever I was capable, for I hold it as great a crime to disobey lawfull authority as to take part in any unlawfull authority.My humble request to take some consideration of this place, either by sending some releife or by olber meanes to withdraw it. If it be your Worships pleasure to with.draw it, send but some goods that is vendible here to put of this iron and you mayhave the slaves sent to Guidah or elsewhere. I have sent your Worship the coppy of Mr Winders contracts made to the Phid algoe and my selfe. [Inclosure) A copy of the contract Mr John Winder made the Phidal goe of Ophra:On consideration that the Phidalgoe hath promised me to goe on board CaptainRichard Sheppards ship the St George, I doe promise not to goe on shoare atGuidah , but after some small stay on board the ship to return againe to Ophra ; and if I shall act any thing contrary to my promise , doe hereby oblige myselfe to thesaid Phidalgoe in the debt of 30 slaves, and doe give him free liberty to take thesame in iron if I shall faile to returne, in witnes s whereof have hereunto sett myhand dated this 27th day of June (1682). The copy of Mr John Winders condition made to me (John ThornelThe cond ition of this obligation is such that whereas the above said John Thorneshall upon the special request and intreaty of the above bounden John Winder use all his endeavour to prevaile with the Phidalgoe of Ophra to perm ill the said JohnWinder to goe aboard the St George in the road of Guidah upon the said Coast ofArda, whereof is Commander under God Richard Shepheard, and hath engaged hisestate to the said Phidalgoe that the said John Winder shall returne to Ophra andnot goe on shoare at Guidah aforesaid, that then this present obligation to be voidand of noe effect, or else to stand and be in full force and venue. 493. John Wincler70 Guyclah, 15 March 1682/3 Wherea s John Thorne in his letter of the 28th January last accuseth me of thefollowing misclemeanours: lstly. That upon my arrivall at Ophra the 12th day ofFebuary 1681/2 I desired thePhidal goe that I might reside in his country and that he would protect me from MrSmith, whome I pretended was my enemy and would have me to Guidah; of which(he saith) I had advice before from Mr Spurvay.2ndly. That I received a letter from Mr John Smith the 22nd following wherein Iwas desired by him, to make all possible hast to Guidah, did acquaint the Phida Igoe that Mr Smith had sent for me with an intent to withdraw the factory from Ophra,and that I againe desir'd his protection, which being granted, he saith I wrote to MrSmith that I was detained by the Phidalgoc and could not possibly come to Guidah.3rdly. Being demanded by the said John Thorne , why I was so unwilling to goe with MrSmith when return'd to Guidah from Ophra, I answered Mr Smith had a mind to keepe me at Guidah, and come to settle at Ophra himselfe, that I had received severall abuses from whitemen at Guidah and that I thought it not a place fill for a factory, in regard the prices of slaves was exhaurted to 25 per cent more then at Ophra. 4thly. That Mr Smith came to Ophra in the night with a spare hammack, and being without sent Francis Capell to the factory, acquainting me with his designe and desireing me to come to him, which (he saith) I did, and as I went acquainted some of the Phidalgoes peop le therewith, whereupon the towne was up in arms and Mr Smith forct to goe without me. Sthly. That Captain Richard Shepheard being arrived at Guidah I desired John Thorne to speake to the Phidalgoe to lett me goe on board him, but he being doubtfull of my returne was unwilling to Jett me goe, upon which he saith I prof .fered him a bond of 100£,71 and another to the Phidalgoe of 60 slaves to be forfeited á if I did not returne, upon which consideration leave was granted to me. 6thly. That the said John Thorne did often solicite me to take care for his departure from Ophra and that I would send him booges to maintaine the factory, and not lett the Companys barrs be sold at soe pittifull a price as 3 pound of booges, to which (he saith) I never returned him an answer. To which particulars I returne these answers: To the 1st. I acknowledge I arrived at Ophra around the time John Thorne mentions , but that I had any intention to reside there I utterly deny; neither did I ever request the Phidalgoe to protect me from Mr Smith, having no other intention but to returne to Guidah as soone as I had completed my business, and acquainted the Phidalgoe with the Agent Generalls and Councills instructions; and as to what he saith that I had notice from Mr Spurvay of Mr Smiths ill intentions towards me, I call God to wittness I never received any letter from him in my life; neither doe I remember I ever soe much as mentioned his name to John Thorne. To the 2nd. I acknowledge that I wrote to Mr Smith in answer to his of 22nd February that the PhidaJgoe did detaine me, and that I had soe great a watch over me that I could not possib ly make my escape, but that it was my owne contrivance, I againe call God to wittness, tis a most notorious lye, and I hope not to be credited; since Thorne doth attest in the 5th article, that I went on shoare at Guidah, and forfeited bonds I had given for my returne. To the 3rd. I acknowledge I did often say that I thought Ophra more convenient for the Companys factory then Guidah, by reason of the cheapness of carrying goods to the factory from the waterside was not soe great, and that slaves were to be had there at a far lower rate. As to what he saith that I told him of Mr Smiths designe to keep me at Guidah and settle himself at Ophra, I doe attest that the said John Thorne did endeavour to perswade me Mr Smith bad such a designe, which I never credited, knowing he did it on purpose, to alienate my affections from the said MrSmith. 72To the 4th. l can safely take my corporall oath, that when I went out oftlle factoryto Mr SmiUl, I did it with as real a designe to make my escape with him to Guidahas ever I did any thing in my life, and might have gon away had not Thorne sent theBlacks to panyare us. To the 5th. I acknowledge il true, and that I did give a bond of l 00£ to John Thorneand of 30 Slaves to the Phidalgoe for my returne to Ophra, without which I couldnot possibly escape, and here I des ire John Thornes roguery may be taken noticeof, for ifhe had noe designe to prevent my goeing away, why did be make me givehim a bond to assure him of my returne.To the 6th. I confess rnever sent John Thorne any booges, it being contrary to myorders to send any goods or any person there till he was gon off. 494. John Winder Guydah, 24 June 1683 Your severa ll letters of the 17th and 19th of Apr ill, with those of the 10th and 12thof May, lyes now before mee, haveing in pursuance to your orders therein specified,don my utmost endeavour for the dispatch of the Royall Companys ships that are lately gon from hence, and should have ere now dispatcht the canoe with advicehad the weather been a little more favourable, but the canoemen have been forct to stay some time to repaire the canoe, muc h damag'd by her often oversetting in theseboysterous seas . I am most heartily sorry 1 am Foret to give you account of theunhappy misfortune befaJlen the Royall Company by Captain Lowe and Woolli.fords ships being taken, as also per the loss of the Blessing. I shall forbeare totrouble you with every particular circumstance hereof, because itt is largely ex.press'd in the inclosed from Cap tain Lowe to theAgent, 73 and only acquaint you inthe gcnerall that the 16th ultimo in the evening the two pyrates mentioned in yourletter of the 12th ditto came downe to this roade, and tooke Captain Lowe, whoemade some smaJI resistance. Captain Rickards people cult their cable and went outof the roade, but before the ship came ashoare tooke the gold out and left her, which[ship] is lost, and not anything saved out of her. The mens intent was to run awaywith the gold, in order whereunto they gott aboard the Dutchmen in Ophra roade,but by U1e endeavour of Captain Rickard and myselfe and some small matter giventhe Phidalgoe for his assistance (whoe I must needs say was verry helpfuH to us)part of itt is recovered, and one bulse containing 28 marks, 3 ounces and 7 anglessent the Royall Company by Captain Woolliford. The rest Captain Rickards hascarried with him in the Merchants Bon adventure, whoe departed this roade 5 dayessince. Captai n WooJlifords men left the ship, which the pyrates tooke the next morning with all the gold in her, they pretended they would have fought but that 12 of their guns were in the hould, which was the occasion of their flight.74 Perhaps ill may be immagined that itt was my fault hee was not gon off with his complement before, but I call God to wittness I did my utmost endeavour, as Captain Lowe and Rickard will justifie to the Royall Company, and doe affirme that would hee have been ruled by mee hee might have been dispatcht. Att my arrival! with him, I found the trade much altered in my absence, the people craveing to have the measure for booges altered, and the price of slaves in many goods to be advanc'd, which I refused to doe, ill being your express order to depress the price, and not to advance itt,75 by which meanes I bought but SOslaves in 3 weekes, but when I had brought the _people to their former customes and they were content to sell their slaves att the old rate, Captain Woolliford came ashoare, and in a great passion tooke the business out ofmy hands76 and immediatly chang'd the measure and brought up a custome of shakeing itt, whereby ilt is become neare 90 pounds, and farther gave 3 fine sletias and halfe, which was never before more then 3, the like in allejars halfe a peece more then usuall,77 whereupon I demanded the cargoe ashoare which you were pleased to consigne mee per bill of loading, but in the presence of Captain Lowe and Captain Rickard, hee absolutely refused to deliver itt to mee, saying that haveing possession hee had 11 points of the law, and that hee would make use of that pa.rt of itt which was most ready to buy Negroes, the rest bee would deliver mee when hee had his complement, since which the pyrates came downe, by whome he says he was plundered and the goods lost, though I can prove that pa.rt of the ca.rgoe consign'd to mee was sent to windward in his boate without my approval!, which was sunk per the pyrates, and for anything I know, might be a greate occasion the ships were taken, for the people in the boate inform'd the pyrates in what posture the ships lay, with their yards and topmasts downe, and many of their men on shoare. 1 have acquainted the Royall Company all large herewith78and have given them cop pie of his bill of loading for the goods, with bills of lioading for the slaves bee said he had aboard, and those aboard Captain Lowe, the same you will receive enclosed, and have likewise sent others to the Royall Companys factors in the West lndias according to your order. I found Mr Armitage ready and willing to comply with your order in all things, and doubt not would have been verry helpefull to mee had hee lived, hee departed this life the LSthultimo, baveing laine sick above 10 days, and by mee and others often advised to settle his estate, and make up his accounts with the Company, which hee neglected to doe, however after his decease in the presence of scverall English men, I inventory'dwhat concerns of his was in the factory, and have taken itt into my possessio n, ofwhich the Roy all Company and his freinds in England shall have a just accompt. [have now no person with mee whom I dare trust (excep t William Belwood), have.ing sent Mr Still to Ophra, and the rest that came downe with mee rfind to be suchsottish fellowes, that I dare not be out of the fact0ry an houre unless I leave Belwoodatt home, for which reason I most humbley intreate your favourable constructionfor my non complyance with your order in sending him up, for I ca n at present aswell spare my right hand as him. Captain Quow hath been au Ophra, being orderedby mee to proceed according to your instruction, hee will give you an account ofthe Phidalgo's answer to his pallavora. I likewise desired Captain Rickard to ac.quaint him with every circumstance of your order, and hee tells me that the PhidaJ.goe replyed that the first ship of the Companys that goes thither shall hav e Thorneaboard, provided they will carry him to England and not to Cabo Corsoe, and thathce will comply with all your demands whensoever the Company begins to con.tinue their trade with him. Ifl might advise, I think ill would not bee amiss to order one ship thither for tryall, and accordingly tbe Royall Company may pr oceed withthese people. Mr Windover continues still at Appa about 15 leagues to leward ofthis place.79 I have informed Captain Wyborne according to your order. that hee [=Wendover] is considerab ly in the Companys debt and that ifhedetaines him itt willbe att his own perrill, to which hee returned that hee was not anywise imployed byhim, and promised mee to use his endeavour to gett him heither, when he doth Ishall comply with your order in sending him to Cabo Corsoe. The present you werepleased to send the King of Guydal1 was thankfully received per him, with many promises of continuing a faire correspondence with the Royall Company, but ifmasters of ships have liberty to give what they please for their slaves and spoyletrade au their pleasure, the endeavours of the factors they have will be frustrate,and this place in short time of noe advantage to them. Andrew Crosbie went off inCaptain Churchey, and Robert Chapman is dead. Captain Wyburne is lately re.turned from a place called Abree, about 16leagues to windward of Guydah , where hee hath been about 6 weekcs buying slaves for Captain Booth, an interloper. 80 Iunderstand iu is a good place for slaves, and doe know that Wyburne intends to settle a Whiteman there, but had I your order I would prevent him, or au leastwise share the trade of that place by hoysting a flagg there for the Royall Company. The cheife goods they covett are booges, tapsells, allejars and pintado's. I have enclosed return 'd your letter to Captain Waugh, who was gon off the coast before the pyrates came downe. I heare he gotthis slaves att Quitto, a place about 5 leagues to leward of the River ofVallta. 82 Hee came not downe to Guydah, but I am credibly inform'd hee sent mee a letter which Captain Woolliford intercepted and never came to my hands, soe can give you noe further accoun t of him. Captain Lumley arrived here two dayes since, whoe I doubt not may have his comp lement in 10 dayes, he givei ng the same rates that others have don before him, without whic h nothing is to be don, unless these people see that wee can send our ships to Ophra. Had I a good supply of booges, I might probablely, when ships are absent, bring them to the old rate, and I am sure, could in 10 dayes time, noe sh ips being here, purchase a good parcell of slaves for the next ship that came . The goods most in request att present are booges, corrall, white baftas, broad pintado 's, white ground, allejars, sletias, white pautkaes, and brass panns. If your Worship would be pleased to entrust me with a small parcel! of each, itt shaJI be my greate cMe to imploy them to the utmost advantage of the Royall Compa ny, and desire that I may have a proportionable part in booges, for without halfe in halfe noe slaves are to be had, and I doe hereby reiterate the promise I made to you att Cabo Corsoe of being faithfu l\ to my masters and not to convert their stock to the use of interlopers. 495 . Petly Wyborne Guydah, 26 June 1683 Yom letters of the 30th December and 23d March I have received, which binds me soe much to serve you that I shall never be able to performe my duty, but will to my power. l have never refused the Companys service nor I never will, but truely without a verry great loss I cannot leave this place in a little time, not soe soon as to have oppertunily to waite upon you au Cabo Corsoe before you goe, if you goe when your first three yeares is out. In what I can be serviceable to the Company here, I will and doe itt faithfully, The Dutch are seUeing a factory att Popoe, which they have had formerly, ill is 8 leagues from this place.83 I have an acquaintance about 8 leagues to windward of itt.84 The cheife people have obliged themselves to mee, I know itt is a place that in a short time would be verry convenient for the Company, being well managed, there is noe gold but there is aggree85 and slaves, come always is plenty; I have some trade with them, I send from Guydah to this place by river.86 If I can serve the Company in setUeing a factory for them and you are pleased to send a quallified man or two for that purpose, I will not question the doeing of itt. I question not but I could send you a letter to Accra wilhin land. Mr Winder shall want nothing I can serve him in. I trouble you 110t with account of pyrates because he tells me hee doth. 