IX SHIPS As was noted in the Introduction, a large number of the letters in the Rawlinson collection (145 of 640 in 1681-3) were received not from the RAC's factories in West Africa, but from ships operating along the coast (or, sometimes, from factors accompanying such ships, who were temporari ly onshore). These included both locally based vessels -characteristically, smaller craft such as 'brigantines', 'sloops' and 'ketches' -which unde11ook coasting voyages from Cape Coast Castle, to both east and west, and ships involved in trans-Atlantic voyages. COASTING VOYAGES The African Merchant, Commander Samuel Starland 496. Samuell Starland From aboard the Affrican Merchant , 3 Aug. 1681 Yesterday I received yours from Commenda by the hand of Captain Bracons 1 couzen, and according to your orders I shall doe the utmost of my endeavour. When he brought the letter hee told mee that Captain Bracon would have mee send 100 of niccanees ashoare, but hee sent noe money soe I sent him none. And this morning hee came a board with money for 100 and would have had 50 more without, and said that Bracon was very angry, for it was your order that hee should have what hee sent for, but I have sent him none as yet nor shall not without youx order. Wee are now about a league to windward of the Mine and in hopes within a day or two to fetch Commenda, which has seemed to mee a very long passage. As for the prizes of good[s] I can give you little account at present, onely this, wee have had several) canoes aboard, I could have sold halfe the powder at 5 pease 2 angles per barrell for noe more, and severall of the blew baftes the broad at Sa and the narrow att 2.a, and most of the best knives at la per dozen, but what the prizes will be att Com.menda I know not as yet. 497. Samuel Starland From aboard the Affrican Merchant , Comenda Road, 6 Aug. 1681 I received yours dated the 3rd of this instant , and that night I gott into Commendaroad. I have disposed since of all the niccances I had and 4 barrels powder, l say, I gingham, 1 piece of haft broad. This day Captain Bracon came aboard, whome ltreated according to your worshipps command as well as the shipp could afford, him and all the rest of his friends. If you think fitt to send mee any more niccanees,which I find here the onely commodity au present, be pleased to let mee have them soe soone as your worshipp can, I beleeve I may dispose of as many more as I hadand according to the raites I gave you an account of before, I find the same proffershere by most that come aboard. I onely gave you an account in my last of what Ihad found betwene the place l then rid alt all [sic: and?] Cape Corsoe, not that Iintended to trust any goods ashoare or sell any under the rates I had your order for. 498 . Samuell Starland From aboard the A ffrican Merchant, Commenda Road , 28 Aug. 1681 These are to give you notice that I sent the canoe a Satureday up to CaptainWoodfine to give him an account that you would not have him dispose of any ofhis goods tilJ advice from your worshipp , and the last night about 8 a clock shecame aboard againe, otherwise I had sent her downe before now. A Sunday CaptainBrakon was aboard of him. I desired to know the reason wee had noc trade here,hee told mee because our goods was att too deare a rate. I desired him for to tellmee the prizes that they would give for such goods as I have a board, whichaccording to his price I have here sent your worshipp an account, per I say lo 2a,12 musketts per bendy, per one barrell powder 1o 4a, per I gingham Sa, per 1broadbaft Sa, per I ditto narrow 3a, I pewter jugg 4a, per J dozen knives of the best sortla , for the other 6ta, per l lead barr l a, which hee saith hee can buy soe out of theCompany ships and out of interlopers a great deale cheaper. He saith if wee can sellthem soc, that they will come here before any other shipps. I have now on boardI Sm 4o 7a of gold and one man slave. 499. Samuell Starland From aboard the Affrican Merchant, riding off Cormanteen, 28 Aug. 1681 These are to satisfie you that wee have possession of the small shipp with littledamage, onely the master of her wounded in the hand, but on our side noe hurt atall.2 There is all their men come in the canoe, onely two which is left aboard. According to your order I have sent the key of the masters chest to your worshipp, hee desireing that hee might bring itt up with him, and I have also the supracargoe s chest a board of mee. I cannot give your worshipp any further account as to what she has aboard as yett. I begg your worshpps order in what I shall doe. 500. Samuell Starland From aboard the Affrican Merchant, 29 Aug. 1681 Yours of the 28 instant I received, and accord ing to your order I shall use the utmost of my endeavour that nothing be imbarked by any of our people. I have ordred the boatswaine to suffer nothing to goe out of her, and likewise I told their owne two men which is aboard her to see that nothing be disposed of. I have taken all the slaves I found aboard her aboard mee, there being 8, 1 man 4 women 3 boys, and the next morning I understood by them there was 10 aboard, the other two bein g carried aboard Captain Rickard that night she was taken by his canoemen. Yester.day I was aboard him to see if they were there, and hee told mee that they came contrary to his order or knowledge. The rogery I find was in the canoemen, itt being in the night they thought not I beleeve to be discovered. Captain Rickard told mee I might have them or leave them aboard, hee beleeveing that your worshipp would order him the rest, if not he would give a receipt for them, they being 1 woeoman l boy, soe I left them aboard. I hope to be up in 2 or 3 daye s if anything of a land breeze present s. 501. Samuel Starland Anishan, 27 Sept. 1681 I went this morning ashoare to Annamaboe and shewed Mr Thelwall your worships order which you gave me, and he ordered mee to goe to Anishan to Mr Richards there to heare what he and the Curranteere has done about the shells,3 which according ly I went and spoake to them , and the Curranteere saith that to morrow he will come aboard mee and goe downe in the shipp and send his people away by land. 502. Samuell Starland Affrican Merchant , Amersa, 30 Sept. 1681 These are to give you an account that this morning the canoe came on board without any shells and understand by them that the Cabisheer will not lett any come off under the raite hee had before soe desire to knoe what I shall doe as soon as yo u please . [Starland was still at Amisa collecting shells on 11 Oct. 1681, but hoped to complete the work within a week (no.241). In November, he called at Komenda and delivered goods there (nos 37, 39.)] 503. Samuell Starland Aboard the Affrican Merchant, Anamaboe, 2Jan 1681/2 This afternoon I received your commands, and if that I had had anything that had been wo11h troubleing your worship with I should have sent you word. As for the interlopers threatning to lay mee aboard, hee was att the same time more afraid of being laid a board himselfe, for hee presently waid and stood off to sea and I after him for the space of two hours, and then I stood in againe and about an houre afterwards he tackt and stood in againe and came to an anchor, and the next morning I waid and came to anchor alongst his side, and yesterday about 3 a clock hee waid and this morning wee see him att anchor a great deale to leward off of Amersa. Mr Shears was this morning aboard and to.Id mee the blacks were very unkind to him att Annamaboe, but hee went this morning ashoare to Agga. 504. Samuell Starland Aboard the Affrican Merchant , Annamaboe, 5 Jan. [168 1/2) These are to give your worship an account that the interloper is now att anchor as far to leward as wee can well see him, and another ship that came to an anchor by him yesterday in the afternoone but what hee is I doe not know. I sent your worship an account before by the same canoe that brought the letters which was writt by Charles [Towgood], and I have lain here ever since in expectation of your worships further order. In my last I forgott to give you an account that Captain Woodfine would desire your worship to tell his brother not to goe ashoare to Annamaboe upon any account whatsoever, for hee said that the Blacks would certainly murder him. I have sent per the canoe the boatswaine to bring downe the boate if your worship pleases, for if wee should breake a cable wee should want her very much. Mr Richards this morning sent aboard two men in irons desireing mee to keepe them aboard , they being two of the blacks which endeavoured to panyar him.4 Haveing not eke to give your worship an account of, but wishing you your health which l understand by Charles you want at present, which I hope will not be long. 505. Samuell Stadand Aboard the Affrican Merchant , 11 Jan. I 681/2 This morning I received your worships orders for to goe to Amersa5 and shall make the best of my way thither. I have sent the 2 hand canoe up, and desire your worship would bee pleas'd to order us some shovells, for wee have not one aboard. I sent this morn ing aboard of Captain Gates to borrow some of him but hee has none aboard, and without them I know not what to doe . [In early March 1682, Starland was at Anashan, where he took in corn (no.178.)] 506. SamueH Starland Wyamba Road, 27 March 1682 These are to give your Worship an account that I have no more then 5 slaves as yett, 4 woemen and l man. I lay 2 dayes off Tantonquerry but noe canoes came off, soe I went downe to Lague and lay 5 days there and bought but 2 slaves, soe I came downe to Wyamba, where I have now layn l 0 dayes and bought but 3 slaves , but I had a verry faire prospect of purchaseing 30 or 40 if that the Ancrongs had not come soe soone uppon them,6 for the night before there was two of the Queens 7 men came downe and 12 (whereof one lost his head the next morning) slaves that would have been there the next morning, but the Ancrongs came upon them an hour or two before sun riseing. I was then in the towne, for I lay that night ashoare. The people of Wyamba being surprised ran away soe fast as they could, without any resistance at all. They have killed a great many of them and carried a great many away. I have lost one of my canoemen , whether hee bee killed or carryed away I cannot heare, but they have cutt off Mattees head, his body lies in the bushes. Myselfe with the other canoeman lay in the bushes about 6 or 7 hours and then wee gott out and went for Banacoe some 5 leagues to leward of Wyamba. I lost all my cloaths only [= except] shirt and drawers with 4 ounces of the Companys that I had received ashoare, which if I live to see your worship I shall give you a farther account. I designe tomorrow morning to weigh and tume up as far as Momford to see if I can buy any of those slaves they have taken. [PS] It was Fryday last. 507. Samuell Starland Momford Road, 3 Apr. 1682 Your Worships of the 29th of March I received, and according to your order in takeing care of not being supprised I shall take all the care I can. The 28th of March I waied from Wyamba and the 31st ditto I came to an anchor a little to the westward of Momford, where I sent my canoe ashoare with Parrett in her to see if they had any slaves, a11d when hee came aboard hee told mee that hee see the canoeman ashoare which I lost att Wyamba, but they would not lett him come off except I would pay forhim as much as another slave. I have not concerned myselfe in itt, I desire that your Worship would be pleased to order mee what I shall doe in it.8 The last night about 7 of the clock three of our gudgings broake away from our sterne post, and one we had lost before, we haveing only the upper one left, and wee were forst to gett our ruther in upon deck and have noe way to hang him againe. Your Worship was pleas'd to order mee to Accra, but ifl should goe downe now I should be in a bad condition for to gett up to Capo Corsoe againe. I doe not question but to hang him againe upon 3 gudgings more besides that as is left , if I can gett up to take all our things out and bring her by the head. I have noe more slaves aboard then what I gave your Worship an account of in my last. I shall lie still here till I have your Worships order what I shall doe. 508. Samue ll Starland & Arthur Richards 9 Anishan Road, 4 May 1682 These are to give your Worship an account that this morning the Curranteer and Cabisheers of Anishan held their pallavora with several! of the Arcanies, and when satisfaction was demanded for their tradeing with interlopers their answer was that the loss of their goods they thought was enough, and as for any other satisfaction they would not give any thing. They have nothing to say to Mr Richards, only that hee had made them pay for that hee had given them before, and for the townes people they say that they had noe hand in the matter, soe this is all the satisfactio n that I heare is like to be given by either of them. Mr Richards this afternoon sent off 13 iron barrs and towards night came off himse lfe, hee told mee without any hinderance att all, and tomorrow morning I intends to goe ashoare againe and ifhee finds not other satisfaction intends for to send off all the goods if not prevented. The demand made by him was that those two Anishan people that was the first actors should be turned out of the towne, and that the second of the Arcanies and the two that were taken with the goods should be sent up to your Worship, and 40 marke of gold should be paid besides. I have the Curranteer's sonn board still and the Braffo's sonn , soe expecting your Worships further order, haveing not eke to give your Worship an account but leaving the rest to Hansico. 10 509. Samuell Starland Anishan Road, 12 May 1682 I hope this will find your Worship in better health then I heard by Captain Sheppard hee left your Worship in. I am sorry I should give your Worship the trouble of this but necessity forces mee to doe itt. The 5th of this instant att night wee sprang a great leake , and have been ever since endeavour ing to find itt but cannot. Wee make between 4 or 500 stroaks a glass and have done ever since itt first began, soe if your Worship pleases to order mee up to have the advice of a carpenter and for to take out our caske, that wee may have roome to trench our ball is [ = ballast?] fore and aft, I doe not question but wee may find itt. 510. Samuell Starland Aboard the Affrican Merchant, Barracoe Road, 30 May l 682 These are to give your Worship an account that the Wyamba people have all left that place and are gon to Barracoe. I came to an anchor in the roade the 24th instant and sent my canoe ashoare. They met with two men just att the landing which gave them that account, soc next morning I waid and ran downe to Barracoe, where severall of the Wyamba people came off, and some of them which were taken by the Accrongs 11 that had redeem'd themselves, they give mee an account that the Lague and Momford people doe threaten very much what they will doe to the first Whiteman they can take, or if your Worship should send downe any great canoe to leward that they will use the utmost force to take her, and sweare they will cutt of the heads of any Cape Coast people they can light of. The Wyamba people sayes that here is some of them ly's lurking to and again about about the towne. I had a letter writt 3 day's agoe to have given your Worship an account of this, because I heard Mr Towgood saying hee intended to water at Wyamba, but [through] the badness of the weather I could not send the canoe . The last night came to an anchor here Mr Tow good, and this morning sailes. If any of the ships come downe itt will not be safe for them to send their boats for water at Wyamba. Since I came to an anchor here I have bought 6 men slaves and taken about 5 marke of gold. If your Worship pleases for to give me a line or two in order what I shall doe after delivered the remain es of the goods to Mr HasseJJ, 12 whether I shall lye there till further orders or make the best of my way for Cabo Corsoe, for I have nothing mentioned in my orders. 511. Samuell Starland Aboard the Affrican Merchant, off Accra, 11 June 1682 These are to give your Worship an account that yesterday waighing of our anchor wee broke our cable, the currant runing soe strong to the eastward and the wind att S.West wee could not fetch our buoy, soe wee bore away for Accra and fired severall gunns for to gett a canoe off to see if there were any anchors to be gott there, for wee have never a one now and but two thirds of a cable, but wee could not gett any canoe off that night, soe wee stood off to sea all night and in the morning wee stood in and fetcht a little to windward of Accra , and in the afternoone wee had a 2 hand canoe came off to us. I sent to Mr Hassell to see if hee had any or could gett one, soe if this comes to your Worships hand you may know wee have not gott any. Wee must be forc'd to goe to Allampo to Mr Towgood to gett one of him if hee has not lost one. If your Worship can gett one from any of the ships to send itt downe, and a cable with itt. If wee should gett one from Mr Tow good hee will have but one left, which if either of us should have the misfortune to break a cable I know not what wee should doe for one. I have now on board 9 marke of gold and 13 slaves. A Tuseday last came aboard Mr Smith from Arda, 13 very ill, and is here now. Wee have had very bad weather here. Hee presents his service to your Worship and hopes to bee with you very shortly, hee has had a very hazardis and tegious passage, being absent from Whydah since the 18th past. I sent my 2 hand canoe up to your Worship 11 dayes agoe but have not heard of them yett. 512. Samuell Starland Aboard the Affrican Merchant, Allampo, 23 June 1682 These are to give your Worship an account that the 12th instant I came to Al lampo, where I foimdthe Cape Coast Briganteen and gott an anchor out of her; but being very much wind and a great sea I was forc'd to buy an anchor out of a Dutchman that lay here, by reason the anchor that I had from the Briganteen would mot ride the ship. 14 The 18th came to anchor here the Arcanie Merchant, and hee tooke up my anchor which I left attBarracoe, which I have now on board. I would have turn'd up to Accra before now but the currant has run very strong to Jeward ever since I have been here, but the first oppertunity I shall make the best of my way up thither. I gave your Worship an account by a Jetter I sent ashoare to Mr Hassell that night I came off of Accra, desireing him to send itt up by a canoe. I have not seen my canoe nor canoemen never since that I sent them from Barracoe. 15 I should have given your Worship an account before now if that I had had a canoe; if shee be att Capo Corsoe if you please to send her downe for I have a great miss of her. If you please if any oppertunity presents for to send mee downe a cable, for the anchor I bought is upwards of 500 weight and I feare if I should come to an anchor in stiff grounds my cable will hardly weigh him. 513. Samuell Starland Aboard the Affrican Mecham, Accra Road, 6 Aug. 1682 Yours of the 2nd instant I received. I should have given your Worship an account of my proceeding severall times before this if that I had a canoe or Mr Towgood [had one], but I could not gett any between Allampo and Accra. I have been from thence [= Allampo] ever since the 26th of June and have made the best of my endeavour to gett up according to your worships former order. The 2nd of this instant I came to an anchor in the roade of Accra to gett a little wood and wate r and some come, which I am now supplyed with from Mr Hassell, and tomorrow if wind and weather permitt I shall make the best of my way for Cabo Corsoe. I have now on board 50 slaves, some that I tooke out of Mr Shears in his goeing downe and what I have bought my selfe, and 12 marke in gold. 16 514. Samuell Starland Morea Road, 23 Aug. 1682 These arc to give your Worship an account that wee find the cunant runs verry strong to leward which forceth us to ride here, wee haveing noe more then 2 day's come aboard for the Negro's and Mr Towgood about the same quant ity, Mr Shears haveing had none this 3 dayes but what wee have spared him between us. I have now aboard 50 slaves, 21 that I had out of Mr Shears 17 and 29 of my own. [Star.land proceeded to Anomabu, where he landed goods for the factory, but died there on 22 September 1682 (nos 293, 297-8).] Unidentified vessel 18 515. George Phipps Annamaboe, 17 Aug. 1681 I mett Mr Nightinga le off the Morea and delive red your orders to him and accord.ingly wee proceeded on our voyage, onely stay here to take in fresh canoemen for the 7 hand canoe, be assured your orders shall be justly observed by [myseltl 516. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 17 Aug. 1681 According to your honours orders have settled Mr Shears att Wyamba, but not with litle trouble, I was forced to goe 15 miles by land and back againe. Your honour will find by Mr Shears letter that I have made agreement with the Anguinnas, Laguers, Accrongs and Wyamba people and made them take their fittish to be true and trusty to the Royall Affrican Company of England and all their concerns. 19 I mett with Captain Phipps about Morea and very sorry to heare the ill management of Accra fort. Notwithstanding I am tyred of my travell will and shall obey your honours order to the utmost of my power. I intend to goe ashoare att Wyamba and sec how things goe there. If I see Mr Shears will goe bee may, if not convenient may stay, notwithstanding if any thing should happen I will order him to come attAccra. [In fact, Phipps and Nightingale did not go on shore at Winneba, though theyspoke to Shears there (no.386) ; they arrived at Accra on 18 Aug. 1681(no.406).) The John, Commande r Hugh Shears [Shears had been at Winneba in August 168 l, though whether he was thencommanding the John is not certain (nos 385-8). He arrived at Anashan inthe John in late September 168 l (nos 237-8.) 517. Hugh Shears Anamaboe Road, 9 Oct. 1681 As for your Jetter and order I have received with men and goods, and as for two ofour men I have sent your worship in this boate, and as for having care of the vessellTshall doe my best, as for my advise to Captain Lawrance and Captain Woodfinesmates shall not be wanten, and at all oppertunitics I shall give your Worship anaccount of our proceedings , and as buying what 1 can for your Worship I shall doemy best [PS] Now just departing for Amersa. 518. Hugh Shears Alampo, 30 Oct. 1681 This is to give your Worship an account that this morning I have received your order dated the 27th of this instant, the which in the morning wee shall begen to makeour best way for Cabo Corso. As for slaves wee have gott but 34 men, 12 woemen,the cause of nott gotten of slaves is that there lyes a Portugeze and he gives for aman slave l bcndy and for a good women 7 pcze, and likewise Captain How an interloper hath panyard or kept on board 3 Cabbisheers, 20 the caws (= because] ofit wee dare not venter on shoare. Likewise at Mingo lyes another Portugezc and aFrenchman distance from Alampo about 4 leagues. [PS] As for getten of slaves as wee turne up wee shall doe our best. 519. Hugh Shears Aboard the ship John at Annamaboe , 2 Jan. 1681/2 This is to give your worship an account that the come is on board, which is about 80 chests, soe haveing nothing elce to doe I waite your worship and Councills order. One man is sick, the which I have sent to Capo Corsoe, the which I would have your worship send another man in his roome or order to take out of Mr Starland, and one man more if you please to send would not be amiss, and order the gunner to send mee 6 granadoes more and 6 pound of brimstone if you please , for I have heard that an interloper will be on board of us, likewise if your worship can send mee one small grapnell. The anchor that was mended at Capo Corsoe the first time wee putt him on ground is broke as itt was before , the which I have put on shoare at Annamaboe but there are not coales to mend it. [According to Starland 's report (no.503), Shears went aboard Starland's vessel at Anomabu, and landed at Egya on this same day, 2 Jan. 1682.] 520. Hugh Shears Aboard the John, Alampo Road, 30 Jan. 1681/2 This is to give your Worship and Councill an account that all the goods are disposed off, all to 1 barrel) of powder and 13 musquetts. Wee have on board 26 men slaves, 23 woemen and 1 girle. Soe this night if God willing wee shall beginn to make our best way for Capo Corso. Mr Towgood carryes the account with him. [In February 1682, Shears was at Accra, where he delivered goods for the factory, and from where he was expected to return to Cape Coast (nos 423-5); on 30 March he was at A.nomabu, where he also delivered goods ashore (no.266).] 521. Hugh Shears Commenda Road, 4 Apr. 1682 This is to give your Worship an account that wee came into this road Monday last about 4 of the clock in the aftemoone. As for Mr Nightigall hee has done what hee can to gett come but cannot gett it at that rate that your Worship has ordered but they will not sell under 2 angles per chest, and that on shoare for they will not pay canoe hyre, soe haveing nothing else to trouble your Worship withall but waite your Worships further orders? [On 15 April 1682, Shears was at Komenda, and sent to Cape Coast to ask whether he should proceed west along the coast (no.528). On 3 June he was back at Anomabu, where he delivered a letter from Cape Coast (no.275; cf. no.619); he left Anomabu back to Cape Coast on 24 June (no.278).] 522. Hugh Shears Morea Road, 23 Aug. 1682 This is to give an account of our proceedings the which I have sent inclosed, and our bad success in our slaves. Of 24 that was put aboard Mr Starland there are 3 dead, 2 men and 1 boy,22 and of 55 that I bought after there are 2 men dead, not for want of that wee had [sic]. If your Worship please send us some come for wee have none. If your Worship think convenient to send for the slaves, for I beleeve the currant will run for some time, which if itt does with these winds itt i.s but in vaine to way, and likewise wee have no wood nor canoe to send for what wee want. If your Worship hath any canoe to spare if you please Jett us have her, I have not stopt att any place that I cou ld gett one. July the 25th the carpenter run away on board of one Allin, the which by noe means could gett him againe, the cause he saith is that your Worship fired att him and that hee was take n by the Kings ship by the Com.panys meanes. [PS] Departed Allampo July the 27th. [By September 1682, Shears had transferred to command of the Cape Coast (no.304). The John may have been decommisioned, since a sail f-rom it was later in use on the Cape Coast (no .535).] The Cape Coast, Commander Charles Towgood, then Hugh Shears [In February 1682 Towgood was at Accra, where he delivered goods (no.425).] 523. Charles Towgood Aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen , Allampo Road, 5 March 1681/2 I thought itt convenient to give your worship an account of my proceeding in this place. I have been here this IO dayes and att my first arrivall found a French man here with 4 othere ships about 4 leagues to windward of mee. The Fre nch man had nothing but bouges , which the natives wanted at that time to buy com e, soe that as long as hee lay here I could not gett a slave;23 and the day before hee went away which was Fryday Captain Gates came to anchor here,24 and hee gives such rates that I am like to lye here a considerable time, besides his pintados are broad and mine are all naITow and hee gives as many of his for a slave as I can of mine, soe that I cannot expect to sell any of mine till his bee all gon and then hope they will goe off. I have made shift since hce has been here to gen 8 good men, 6 woemen and 2 boyes with 2 girles, 18 in all which are all verry goode slaves; but I have been forc'd to give l angle upon a head for a man more then what your worship has allowed or elce they would have gon aboard Captain Gates. I intend the first oppertunity of a wind to turne up to Ningo, a place 4 leagues to windward of this place, where I understand there are a few slaves, for I cannot expect to gett many slaves here as long as hee lies here without I could give as great rates as hee, which is a bendy a bead. I wish I had a few green and blew perpcttuanos more, for those that I had of that sort which were 8 are all gone and they aske for them now extreamly. Just now my canoe came from'the shoare, but the sea runs so high that they are not able neither will they venture to bring off a slave. They have promised to bring mee about IOor 12 as soon as they can gett off. [PS] This goes by my canoe as far as Accra and then to goc up with the first conveniency. Robert Crow lies very ill of a voiolent feavour. 524. Charles Towgood Allampo Road , 17 Mar ch 168 1/2 Last night about 8 of the clock I received your Worshipp and Councills orders, which I will follow the first oppertunity that presents.25 I wish itt had come 2 or 3 dayes sooner, for there was a 2 hand canoe on board mee that belong'd to Morea which I could have detain'd with case. About 10 dayes since I sent your Worship a letter, itt bare date the 5th instant, ill went in my canoe as far as Accra, and then to be sent up with first convenciency; wherein racquainted your Worship of the great prices Captain Gates gave and of his pintados being broad and mine narrow, which hindred the sale of mine, but hope I shall put all off when hec is gon, which will bee tonight. I have on board att present 40 good slaves, most of them men and boyes, but as I acquainted your Worship in my last I have been feigne to give I angle upon a head for a man more then what your worshipp allowed mee, and glad I could gett them soe too, hee giveing a bendy a head in all goods. I hope to have the rest of my slaves in a small time if the bad weather does not hinder the bringing them off. [PS] I wish I had a few more irons for I beleeve l shall have occasion for them, haveing but 25 pairs aboard and some of them the rust has eaten quite out, for when I goe to make use of them they breake in the eye of the shakle. 525. Charles Towgood Allampo Road, 19March 1681/2 This morning I received a letter from your worship and Councill with an inclosed for Captain Gates, who sailed from hence a Fryday haveing 156 slaves, hee puttingon board mee his remains with a letter for your Worship, which I send here inclosedwith the letter that came from you to him. His remaines was only 16 Guyney stuffsfor which I gave him a receipt. 26 I have on board att present 45 good slaves, mostmen, and hope to have as many more by that time your worship has ordered meeto depart from hence. A Fryday morning dyed a woeman which I bought but 2 dayesbefore, shee was as likely a slave as any I have on board, alsoe very sullen andwould not eate, for the Docter opening of her found her verry sound but starv'd forwant of eating. This morning I sent one whiteman ashoare to stay till I sailed, forthey sent off word they would not bring off a slave before I sent one, for feare ofbeing panyard. 526. Charles Towgood Allampo Road, 24 March 1681/2 I intended to have followed your Worships order which bare date the 15th instant tomorrow morning if I had not received your orders to the contrary about 4 hourssince (which bare date the 2 1st instant), with JO pairs of irons, but neverthelessseeing noe likelyhood of getting slaves here, there being noe slaves in the towneand 2 English interlopers lying here and the French sloope, and my water spendingand noe likelyhood of getting more here, I intend to depart the first oppertunity of a breeze with what I have (which is 50 good slaves) and make the best of my wayfor Capo Corsoe. I shall likewise take what care I can to secure the Companysvessel! and concerns against all Dutch sloopes and canoes that shall oppose mee,to the best of my power. Since my last which bare date the 19th instant there diedone of the best men that I had on board of a voiloent fcavour, his tongue beingscorched in his mouth, the reason I know not, only beleeve twas through theNegroes beating of him when hee was panyard. [At the beginning of April 1682, Towgood was at Accra, where he embarkedgold and slaves (nos 429-30) .] 527. Charles Towgood Commenda Road, 13Apr. 1682 This serves to acquaint your Worship that last night about 7 a clock I came to ananchor in this roade, and this morning early I went ashoare to acquaint the lraidersof my comeing and told them what goods I had and the prizes, but their answer tomee was that they did admire that your Worship did send noe more goods to thefactory ashoare, for then they would give those prizes, but lo come aboard theywould not to buy goods alt those rates, when they could buy them cheaper else.where, soe that I wish your Worship would order mee up higher, where I beleeve I should make a quicker dispatch then to stay here. There has not a canoe been aboard to day, for here lyes 2 interlopers, one is Aushhead of Redriff, the other is a Bur.mudian. This goes by my canoe, which I have lent to Mr Shears because shee is not able to carry rnee anywhere, shee being all to peeces; soe I shall borrow his canoe if I have any occasion, and I would pray your Worship that if you have anyother that you can spare that you would be pleased to send itt by the canoemen , I not knowing what to doe without one , and that your Worship will be pleas'd when you order Mr Shears downe, to order him to lett mee have one of his slaves hee haveing 3, I haveing great occasion , rnakeing 500 stroaks a glass. (PS] If your Worship please to order mee that if any come presents In the time of my stay that I may buy itt, I will. 528. Charles Towgood Commenda Road, 15Apr. 1682 This morning I received your Worships and Councills letter dated the 14th instant, upon which I went ashoare to acquaint the people of itt, but they told mee they would buy all the goods, says, perpetuanoes and blanketts excepted; but I find in your Worships letter that only sayes and perpetuanos were excepted, and likewise that if they did not comply with that, that then 1 should ply up to windward with Mr Shears, which I am ready to doe, but only thought itt convenient to give your Worship advice and waite for your answer and that if your Worship order mee to deliver these goods ashoare, whether 1 shall goe up to windward with the remaines or what I shall doe, I only attending your Worships further orders. [PS] Mr Shears present s his service to your Worship and desires to know whether hee shall goe to windward without mee if that you order mee otherwi se. I would desire your Worship that if you can spare another canoe that you would be pleased to send itt in the roome of this that comes downe, shee not being able to swim above water. Ther e is more in this pallavora then I can immagine about these goods. [PPS] Since the wrighting of this letter the blacks sent word that they would not take the great basons. And just now arrived here the Arcanie Marchant , Captain Attwell, 27 soc I sent the canoe on board him to know if hee had any commands for Capo Corsoe, upon which hee sent mee a pacquett which I have forwarded to your. ,gW,orsh1p..529. Charles Towgood Charles Fort, [Annamab oe]. 27 May 1682 Haveing an oppertu nity by a canoe that came from Cabo Corsoe this day, thoughtitt convenient to give your Worship advice of my proceeding here. I am just nowgoeing aboard intending to saile, haveing gott my wood and come, but faine to givegreat rates for itt, there lying 3 ships here; I should have had itt before now but thatthe bad weather that has been here for 4 or 5 days hindrcd them from bringing itt;which bad weather I am afraid will be a great hinderance to mee au Allampo. [Towgood proceeded to Beraku , where he arrived on 29 May, and left thereon 30 May 1682 (no.510). Around the beginning of June 1682, he was atAccra, from where he called at Teshi (no.429).] 530. Charles Towgood Aboard the Cape Coast Brigameen, Allampo Road, 23 June 1682 I had given your Worship an account of my proceeding before now but that badweather hindered it. l haveing been here this 3 weeks and have gott noe slaves byreason of 2 Dutch ships that has been here that had great store of cowries, andlikwise 2 English interlopers, but nevertheless I had gott slaves if the Dutch Com.panys ships had not given the Negroes greate dasheys that they should not come aboard of mee; which I should not have knowne but that the Negro's themselvestold mee that the Chiefe Cabusheers of the towne would prendce them a cow if anycame aboard of mee with slaves. Since which time one of the Dutch ships is gone and the other has but few good goods that is lilt for this place, soe that I should havehad slaves but that Captain Attwell came downe just as I had made the pallavora(which was a Sunday last) and gives such greate rates that I cannot expect to gettany, soe that I intend to tume up to windward with first oppertunity about 6 leagesto windward of this place, where there is both gold and slaves, hopeing to disposeof most of my goods. Mr Starland about 12 day's since came to this place withoutan anchor, soe I lent him one of mine to ride by for the present, haveing but one leftmyselfe, since which time hee procured one out of one oftbe Dutch ships but gavea very great rate, which hee could not helpe because my anchor would not ride him,bee driveing athwart the Dutch.mans barse; soe hee intends likewise to turne up toAccra with the first converuency.29 I beleeve Mr Smith inform'd your Worship ofthe great leake I sprung att Accra, since which I have sprung another, they are bothin the worst places of the vessell to be come alt, one of them being in the very scaggLsic:=?] of the stem e post, the other in the stem or rather between that and a false stem, which cannot be come att without cutting some timbers, which will endangerthe vessel!. The force of itt wee have stop't by stuffing in a great quantity of tallowand coales beate together, nothing else being to be done. Captain Attwell told mee that your Worship ordered him to putt his remaines aboard of mee when he had done here, because your Worship cares not how Iiule goods goe to Arda,30 soe that J intend if your Worship doc not order mce to the contrary to come downe when he is ready to goe and take them in. 531. Charles Towgood Aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen, Accra Road, 6 Aug. 1682 I received a letter from your Worship and Councill directed to Mr Starland and mee dated the 2nd currant, wherein your Worship admires att my soe long silence, which should have been but that (wee have been turning up ever since wee received your last letter, hopeing to have golt to Accra before this time) my canoe being bad and Mr Starland haveing none, durst not Jett her be absent from the ship for feare of anything that might happen in her absence. Since I have been here I have gott wood and water from the forte, which I wanted extreamly, and taken all the slaves that Mr Hassell had in the forte that was any thing likely, that is 12 men, 20 woemen and I boy, in all 33, and have on board att present 28 good slaves, soe that I hope with what slaves I shall gel! in turning up and what MrStarland and what Mr Shears will gett will make a good quantity. Mr Shears haveing purchased about 20 odd slaves comeing downc, which hee putt aboard of Mr Starland, desired a few goods of mee to make up a full complement all Allampo, which I spared him, that is 20 sayes and 20 perpettuanoes, 31 and likewise lett Mr Hassell have I case of sayes, a bale of perpetuano's and 48 tapsells, which I tooke their receipts for.32 I intend God willing in company of Mr Starland, wind and weather permitting, to depart this place tomorrow morning. 532. Charles Towgood Aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen, Morea Road, 23 Aug. l 682 I seeing noe likelyhood of getting into Cape Corsoc roade, by reason of the strong leward currant and small land breeze, I thought ill convenient to know your Wor.ships pleasure, whether you will have the slaves to Capo Corsoe or whether I may caITy them downe to Captain Nurse att Anamaboe, for I have but one day's come aboard and Mr Shears has butt a meale, and that I spared him this morning. I have on board 31 slaves of mine and 32 of Mr Hassells, I had 33 of his but one man died á 33 yesterday mommg. [PS] This comes by the Docter, whoe did desire to be the bearer for he has a requestto your Worship. [On 8 September 1682 , Towgood was expected at Komenda, to embark theRAC factory there (no.83) . At some point, he presumably returned to CapeCoast, and command of the Cape Coast was assumed by Hugh Shears. Tow.good himself commanded the sloop Ann from December 1682 onwards (nosS49-S9) On IS Septembe r 1682 Shears was in command of the Cape Coastat Anomabu , where he took in com (no.304).] 533. Hugh Shears Allamp a, 30 Sept. 1682 I have received yours dated the 27th of this instant, wherein your Worship com.mands mee to make the best of my way which I can unto Cabo Corsoe, which bythe grace of God I shall accordingly performe , for praise be to God I have att thispresent 6S verry good slaves, and 3 slaves more I was forc'd to pay upon CaptainWares account, for the Negro's kept Captain Nurs's man and mine which wee gavefor pawnes, and would not permitt them to come aboard, for Captain Ware didpanyar 3 freemen and slaves, and wee had much adoe to gett them to trade with us. I cannot sell one of the musketts, they are soe verry bad, and I have sold verry fewof the perpettuano's red, by reason that they have warrs in the place where theyvend them. I have been verry lame in my right hand, which hath been a greatehinderan ce of trade and forceth mee to make use of the Docter in writting unto yourWorship, but praise be to God itt is upon the mending hand. 534. Hugh Shears Annamaboe Road, 29 Oct. 1682 Havein g received your Worships order to deliver what slaves the sloope could takein, which Mr Carter told mce 60, which I deliver, 25 men, 30 women, and 5 boyes,Fryday last att night, soe haveing nothing else to trouble your Worship withal] attpresent, hopeing for your good health hopeing tomorrow or Tuseday at farthest towaite on your Worship. 535. Hugh Shears Mine River, 28 Nov. 1682 This is to give your Worship an account [that] as soon as I received your Worships order I sent the canoe on board of Captain Branfill with your letter, and last nighthee sent his boate and his 2 carpenters and 1 barrell of pitch and 1 barrel! of tarr,and likewise according to your Worships order have sent Joseph Ferera andBostian, and if your Worship have ocam [= oakum) send itt in this canoe, for weewant and shall want itt dayly and I desire your Worship lett us not want itt, and ifyour Worship have any wait nailes and small spikes wee shall want them for thebottom of the vesselI. [In January 1683, Shears was reported to be sailing west along the coast, and to have reached Cape Three Points (no.86).] 536. Hugh Shears From aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen In Succondee Roade , 24 Feb. 1682/3 This is to give your Worship an account that last night wee came into this road , and here wee found Captain John How and Mr John Groome, but as for Mr Groomes ship is in peeces or in bulge34 ashoare, and the wind proved easterly, I thought itt good to save what things wee could of that remaines. There are some of the men would willingly serve your Worship if you be please to entertaine them, 35 if not that they may come and stay att Cabo Corsoe till they can gett a passage to goe home or elcewhere. Wee lay att Cape Appalonia 36 IO dayes, and in that time the 8th vessell, and wee sold only 25 barrells powder and some sheets and 10 three pound basons, the powder att lo 12a Ota a barrell, and could gett noe more because the other ships sold at 1 o 8a -ta. And as for treating with the natives, wee did what wee could, but they will not lett any man to settle on shoare because the country people are their masters 37 and then they shall gett nothing to live on, and they say they must looke to themselves and doe not want ships to goe on board of. Mr Sanders is dead, bee dyed the last Sunday. Since I have sold 40 odd perpetuano's, as for sayes they proffer noe more then 14 angles a piece. Iron and tallow they doe not take. For today, sold one barrell of powder att 1 ounce 10a, and since wee came from Dick.iscove sold the remainder of the sheets, soe wee have tooke noe more then 14 marks and odd ounces att present. (PS) Captain Quow presents his service to your Worship. 537. Hugh Shears Off of Annamaboe, 27 Feb. 1682/3 This is to give your Worship an account of what befell us since our departure from Cape Corsoe, for haveing noe land breezes but the wind att S.S.W. [var. W.S.W.] and S.W., could make no orphing [= offing] without a greate loss, and the currant runs to the eastward verry strong , and the more wee towed thinking to gett to windward, the more wee goe to leward, soe now wee lye to an anchor here off shoare about 3 Jegues, expecting the currant to about or a tumadoe. I asbure your Worship wee have used the best of our endeavours to gett to windward but cannot att present. Our mainsaile is too little and foresaile verry bad, and if not for the name of a mizon [=mi zzen] wee were as good have none, being a small saile and old thatbelonged to the John. [On 23/25 April 1683, Shears was at Sekondi, where he assisted in an abor.tive attempt to establish a factory (no. l).) 538. Hugh Shears From aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen off of Dickiscove, l5 May 1683 Yours I have rece ived, and as for the ships your Worship wrights of, wee did notsee nor heare of them before this present that your Worship gave us notice of itt, and as for what care possible for the preserving the Royall Companys goods, I shalluse my best endeavour and if not possible, they shall have little benefitt by us. Ihave heard by the blacks of a ship cast away to windward , which I suppose theserogues have taken and sunk, for they took several! goods on the shoare and Sundaylast wee tooke up a muskett chest empty. Sorry I am for what hath befell CaptainLumley and the rest.38 As for Succondee people they would have us stay till thepeople come out of the cou ntry that they have sent up, I would have the Caboshee rs come on board but they would not, but sent the Teetee, but hee spake as beforementioned. Tomorrow God willing Captain Quow and Captain Coffee shall taketheir journey into the country, for God willing wee shall gett in with the sea breezetoday. As for tradeing is but bad, for wee have taken noe more as 4 marks. 539. Hugh Shears From aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen, Succondee , 21 May 1683 As for sending into the country by the way of Dickiscove I did what I could, andlikewise Captain Quow and Captain Coffee, but they would not, the cause that thewaterside people threatened them and told them that if wee sent that the Addoomeswould come downe and destroy Succondee and afterwards destroy Dickiscove, butthey told mee they would venture them, soe I would leave a Whiteman and onlygoods to maintain e him, and your Worships people should goe where they pleas'dand they would send guides with them, the which I told them J had not order for itt.Fryday last came the Bra ffoe of Succondee and the Tetee came up to Dickiscoveto us, and would not goe on shoare before wee went downe to Succondee and then not without the flagg, because the Addoomes had threatned them, soe yesterdaythey sett up our flagg, and afterwards came a Cabosheer that was sent from theAddoomes to see the flagg sett up,39 [he] came on board with the Captain of thesouldiers and their wives and attendants, because they say they were never on board of a ship before, but I rather beleeve they came to see what would be given them, the which I could not doe otherwise but to give them a dashey on your Worships behalfe, soe this morning the abovementioned Cabosheers hath taken Captain Quow and Captain Coffee up in the country with them and they say they will be here a Thursday next. If you please to send mee an order, for in my last your Worship doth not mention James Parris what shall be don with him, nor what goods shall be left to maintaine him on shoare, but if your Worship thought fitt to send a man att once and goods, itt will be less charges to him and to avoyde further trouble and expence for the future. This afternoon is come a great boate and a great canoe from the Mina to take their goods away, which now they brought some to the waterside. Pray dispatch the canoe. As for the 2 ships wee know not what they were, but [they] have taken the Se1jant of Axim with them and taken Agent Pearsons small vessell and fought a Dane that they have robbed likewise, but the men is gott on shoare as the blacks saith. 540. Hugh Shears From aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen , Succondee , 26 May 1683 Yours I have received dated the 24th of this instant. As for what the Dutch doth intend to doe I know not att present, but they have carryed away their goods but the whitemen stay here still. As soone as Captain Quow and Captain Coffee comes I shall talke with the Cabbasheers about what must be given them only, and as for dashy's given when the Factor comes I shall doe my best to helpe him, and as for the Cabasheer s that tooke the fetish for the Dutch I cannot as yett resolve you, but they make a show all in generall to be verry glad for the English settleing here. As for disposeing of goods I must not expect to dispose of noe more whilst I lye here , for Captain Clarke arriv'd here on Thursday last, whose factor goes in this canoe. I have disposed about 7 marks in goods. I have sent your Worship a torte)!. This instant came Captain Quow and Captain Coffee out of the country and hath some of the Addoomes with them, and they will prendee the Cabasheers 4 cowes and 1 bendy of gold for pulling downe our flagg staff, and as for what elce alt present I cannot satisfie you because the people are weary, but tomorrow wee shall be better satisfied and then 1 shaJJ send a canoe. This canoe 1 would detaine till tomorrow, but Captain Clarke would needs send your Worship your letters. 541. Hugh Shears From aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen , in Succondee Roade, 29 May 1683 Yours this morning I have received, and as for your better satisfaction I have sent your Worship Captain Coffee. As for Captain Quow I keepe him here till I heare 40 farther from your Worship or a factor comes. As for Tickadoe hee sayes the Cabosheers arc his slaves and they have taken his tongue out of his mouth, meaningthey have pulled downe our flagstaff, for this time they shall pay for itt, but hereafterfor the least offence, hee will send for them in the country, more he sayes as sooneas your Worship begins to build hce will send downe one of his sons to live withthe factor. Captain Clarke saith hee will assist the factor in any thing on shoare andput any goods that is consign'd to the Castle with his boate on land if you please. Ican doe nore more good here at present, for goods I selI none, but I spend on shoare which I am not willing, but cannot helpe itt for ifl goe not on shoare they wi ll comeaboard, and they waitc by the waterside for the factor to come. 542. Hugh Shears From aboard the Cape Coast Brigantccn, in Succondec Roade, 8 June 1683 Willingly would I beare a word or two from you as concerning this place, that Imay satisfie this man that is sent out of the country, for here bee stayes with alt least50 men to waitc on him, for to settle the factor that your Worship intends to sendto this place and to order the townes people what hee thinks good in his behalfe. 41 What your Worship pleaseth that I shall that 1 shall doe as concerning this man,whether hee shall goe in the country to his master or stay here any longer, for Ibeleeve be begins to be weary of staying here soe Jong. As for the Dutch theremainder of their goods and slaves went away yesterday, one Whiteman still remaining. The sooner your Worship sends, the less charges itt will be, for I assureyour Worship I have been att charges this 3 weeks wee have been here since weecame from Dickiscove, and as wee Jay there passed by land a Dutchman fromOccada, 42 and as I was told hee said to the Blacks of that place that the Generali ofCabo Corsoe gave them only a flagg but would not settle the place this 2 or 3 yeares, and lett them not have the occasion to say the same by this place, for they take alloccasion to doe what ill they can. 543. Hugh Sheares From aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen , in Longo [sic: =Ningo] Road, 29 July 1683 This is to give your Worship an account that Satureday last was sennitt wee cameto Allampo and abode 4 day's before wee could buy one slave, though there wereslaves on shoare and severall brought on board and carryed away againe, becausethey would have 7 peaze for a man and 6 for a woeman, for they say the interlopergives a bendy for a man and 7 peaze for a woeman, besides dasheys that they give,and have carried severall slaves by land to Accra to the ships that be there, soe if your Worship and Councill please to consider on itt, Jett me heare as soone as possible, for ifl could give the above mentioned prizes I might have50 or 60 slaves on board and most men.Soe on Thursdaylast came from Allampoto this place, but all one, soe wee have boughtnoe more then 14 slaves which are IOmen, 4 woemen for these goods as follows: 11 sayes, l l/2barreII of powder, 3 allejars, 13 musketts, 36 sheets, I Guyney stuff, 3 paper brawles, 9 iron barrs. 544. Hugh Sheares From aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen, in Allampo Roade, 6 Aug. 1683 YoursI havereceiveddatedthe 3rd of this instant, and shall doe mybest to purchase slaves and as cheape as I can, but as yett I have noe more then 26 slaves on board, the reason one Mr Parris that came from the Barbado's lies at Tisha and gives 9 peaze a head forslaves,but rheare that mostof his gold and goods are gonn. Agent Pearson came into this roade yesterday but will not stay as I heare. I doubt not but to purchase a considerable parcell of slaves in short time, for I expect the people out of the country every day and several!slaves on shoare, but because that Agent Pearson is here they aske greate rates for them, expecting hee wil1give as MrParris did. 545. Hugh Sheares From on board the Cape Coast Briganteen, in Allampo Roade, 25 Aug. 1683 YoursI have received dated the 22nd of this instant, and have according to your order sent my brother in this canoe. As for slaves I have purchased noe more then 62, that is 27 men, 20 womene, 5 boyes, for these people doe not understand to trade, for they are new come out of the country to live here, and two or three that speakes Portuguezecheate the boores of a third or a quarter part of their goods they sell the slaves for. The other people that Jived here before is fled to leward of the River Voltaatt a place called Cetta,43 and the trade that washere beforeis nowthere. Att first when wee came here they were most men slaves, but now hard to be gott. As for slavesI shall doe my best to gett as many as I can, but I am forct to come to windward to gett water, now under saile to goe as far as Tisha. [On 13 Sept. 1683, Shears was off Accra (no.572).) 546. Hugh Sheares From aboard the Cape Coast Briganteen, Tisha roade, 22 Sept. 1683 YoursI have received dated the 4th and 14th of this instant. As for giveing your Worship an accompt, I should willingly doe, but itt cannot be without charges, ofmy proceedings. I have purchased noe more at! present then 87 slaves, whereof wasof men 38 and woemen 44 and boyes 5, and of the men 2 are dead; in gold, 6 marks ,5 ounces, and 12 angles, that is all; and expedit ion I shall make all what is possib leand purchase slaves I can in our way to Cabo Corsoe. [PS) The canoe came but this morning because itt blew hard and grcate currant.Remains 36 men 44 woemen 5 boyes Gold 6m So 12a -ta 547. Hugh Sheares From aboard the Cape Coast Brigante en, off of Acc ra, 28 Sept. 1683 Yours I have received dated the 26th of this instant, and shall doe my best for togett what slaves I can . Slaves are verry scarce here, for I have bought but onewoeman since I gave your Worship the last accompt and about IO ounces of gold.Now wee are under saile bound up to Barracoe to see what wee can doe there asfor purchaseing slaves, and likewise to water and wood, for water to leward is deare and not good, and to lye here alt Accra I see ill is but in vaine for I see noe slaveson shoare. 548. Hugh Sheares From aboard the Cape Coas t Briganteen, Barracoe Road, IO Oct. 1683 Yours J.have received dated the 4th of this instant, and shall doe my best to makewhat hast possible up to Cabo Corsoe , but since I received your order I have hadnoe oppertunity, but only yesterday but blowing weather and leward currant. I haveJaine 9 dayes alt BaiTacoe and have not bought one slave of them, soe I have noemore then 90 slaves and 9 marks, 3 ounces, 15 angles of gold, soe hopeing to seeyour Worship in good health with the rest of the good men in a short time. The Ann , Command er Charles Towgood 549. Charle s Towgood Aboard the Ann Sloope now under saile off Shumah, 5 Dec. 1682 About 2 hours since J received your Worships letter by Captain Coffee, whereinyou admire of my not adviseing your Worship how tradeing goes to windwar d; which shou ld not have omitted but that I sent word on Thursday last by DocterGriffin how that I had sold 22 perpetuano's att 10 angles and that Captain Brackon had promised mee to come off againe on Fryday to buy some say's, but hee was not as good as his word for hee came not till Satureday, and then hee would have had more perpetuano's and narrow niccanees if I would sell them alt 3 angles, which is as Captain Bramfill sells, but for say's hee told mee the traider s was not come out of the country nor would not be there till Monday, soe I would Jett him have neither perpetuano's nor niccanees unless hee would take say's, for there is noe feare but that the perpetuano 's will goe off, being all the goods they aske for unless it be sheets, and the p1icefor the one is IOangles and the other 32 for a bendy, Captain Branfill selling alt the same rate and, which is worse, on Sunday morning the Negro's came aboard and inform 'd mee that both the interloper and Bran.fillhad lowered their say's to 14 angles, which I would not beleeve till I went aboard of Branfill and see itt don before my face, soe that seeing little hopes for mcc to sell any there unless could sell as chcape as hee I weighed the next morning, being Monday. I went to windward and that night gott to Shumah, where Captain Coffee found mee at 4 a clock this morning, haveing been under saile an houre before, and your Worship ordering mee to send word immediatly I have therefore sent my canoe downe to Commenda (with this Jetter) to desire Captain Brackon to forward itt by land by one of his boy's, and I would desire your Worship that you would be pleased to send two or three words to Commenda to meet mee there when I come downe, that I may know what I may doe, for if once the say's were gon, which hope I shall put off to windward, I doc not question the sale of the rest. Herc inclosed is an account of the prices of goods sold by Captain Branfill. Not else at present to informe your Worship of, only that there is 3 ships upon the coast besides Branfill, all interlopers, 2 of which are alt Commenda the other at Dickiscove, one Thornton master, besides two Brandenburgs which went from Commenda to windward last weeke.44 sayes att 14 angles each. perpettuanoes att 10a, blew and green. sheets , a chest for 4a, that is 32 a bendy and one over. iron barrs, 24 for a bendy niccanec s narrow 3a, or IOper bendy 550. Charles Towgood From aboard the Ann Sloope rideing at Dickiscove , 7 Dec. 1682 Your worship and Councills letter of the 6th instant came safe to my hands by a canoe from Commenda, and shall take all care immaginable for the sale of the goods to the best advantage . Yesterday in the morning I came to this place, and presently after the Cheife of the towne came off and told mee that hee would sendup into the country and in 2 or 3 day 's the traiders will be downe and buy goods,that is perpetuano 's, niccanees, sheets and barrs, but for sayes they did not aske after nor have not don between Cape Corsoe and this place, nor as I understand asfar windward as Ashinee but there they goe off att an ounce, and for perpetuano 'sthey say they will give but 10angles for blew and green, but red they will not take,yelt I doe not question to putt all the perpetuano's off with the rest of the goods;and I hope when the traiders come downe to put off some say's too. I doe not heare of any more ships upon the coast then what I inform 'd your Worship in my last,which I hope will make the goods off the faster. Thornton the interloper ly's heregetting of come and the Brandenburgs lies about 2 leag ues to Jeward.45 [PS] I paid the canoe, the men telling mee twas ordered by your Worship to Brackon[thatl I should doe it. 551. Charle s Towgood From aboard the Ann Sloope in Barracoe road, 26 Dec. 1682 Haveing the oppert unity by Mr JohnWinder, whoe came from Accra to this placethis moming,46 I thought itt convenient to informe your Worship of my proceeding,which has been verry bad as yeti, for I have not taken one angle since my departurefrom Capo Corsoe, there being noe money all the way downe, I slop ing at all placesbut noe canoes from any place till I came here, which was about 4 dayes since, andupon my comeing they told mee they had sent up to Anguina to informe the Queenof my being here and that in 3 or 4 daycs the traiders would be downe, but I see noelikelyhood yett, soe intend to stay to see what this morning will produce and thendowne for Accra. Slaves they have some but most for powder, which they wantextreamely. I would faine put off the sayes if I could before I came up but J amaffraid I shall not, this place failing of money, which was never known before. Therecame in company with Mr Winder Patrick Welch and hee [= Winder] fear ing heewould make his escape from him desired mee to take him aboard47and [I did] thesooner because Andrew Johnson lyes verry sick, whoe I am afraid must leave ashoare att Accra for his recovery. [PS] Just att the closeing up of my letter came off a canoe from shoare to tell meethat the reason that the bores was not come downe was because they were fightingwith the Mumford peopl e and would be downe tomorrow. 552. Charles Towgood From aboard the Ann Sloope riding in Accra Roade, 29 Dec. 1682 I received your Worships letter of the 26th cuITant for the secureing the persons that Mr Hassell should send aboard att Barracoe, but the night before they parted frnm mee, only[= except) Patrick Welch, which I shall take care to secure as I inform'd your Worship by a letter sent by Mr Winder, as likewise a full account of my proceedings, which beleeve your Worship have received ere this time, tradeing being verry dead everywhere . The reason of my long stay att Bairncoe was because after I had been there 3 or 4 day 's and had noe trade, the Queen sent downe her man to excuse itt and withall to tell mee that I should have money the next day, but twas noe such thing for I did not receive one angle, soe I came for this place and gave Mr Hassell your Worships letter, but hee tells mee hee wi 11 take none of the goods, only sheets and iron barrs.48 I shall make all the hast up that possible I can as soone as hee hath taken the goods out, without your Worships orders to the contrary. The letter I received last, as also that of Mr Hassells , was broke open, and asking the canoemen how twas they told mee that Mr Winder mett them and oppened the letters. 553. Charles Towgood From aboard the Ann Sloope in Commenda Road , 9 Feb. 1682/3 Although I have info1med your Worship of my proceeding by Mr Shears, yet thought itt convenient to give your Worship an account of itt myselfe in wrighting, for since my departure from Cabo Corsoe I have taken about 12 ounces of gold, most of which has been for sheets, of which I have only 40 remaining, haveing sold only 7 perpettuanoes and . a barrell of powder, although I lay 2 dayes between Shuma and Commenda, and one day att Shumah , the rest of the time I have layne here. Here lyes att present att this place 2 interlopers, the one Captain How and the other Captain Price in Finchams Catt, the latter of which came yesterday, but I beleeve neither of them has taken any money since they came here, for I have not seen one canoe goe aboard of them. Yesterday by a canoe that came from windward I was inform 'd that there was a Companys ship att Dickiscove that would be downe about 4 or 5 dayes but the Commander s name I cannot informe my selfe of. The same canoe told mee that Ashenee was all destroyed by the up country people about 10 or 12 dayes since.49 554. Charles Towgood From aboard the Arm Sloope in Commenda Roade, 11 Feb. 1682/3 Your Worhips of the 10th currant came safe to my hands, and soone after came intothis road. The ship that had given himselfe out to be a Royall Companys ship butproved to be an interloper, one Booth Commander, having for his mate Singletonthat was formerly in the RoyaJI Companys service. As for goods I heare not of anythats more vendible then those I have on board but am not like to sell any, for as theNegro's tells mee Captain Price sells for 13 angles a say and 8 per perpetuanoe. Asto narrow niccanees I have not been asked for one since I came here. 555. Charles Towgood From aboard the Ann Sloope in Commenda roade, 24 Feb. 1682/3 According to your Worships desire of the 10th instant, thought fitt to acquaint youthat narrow niccanees and narrow tapsclls are in great demand, for now the A1á.canies are come downe , but I cannot expec t to sell any of those goods I have onboard by reason the two ships that are here sell cheaper then I can, vizt sayes all 12and 13 angles and perpetuano's att 8 and 9, but I belceve they have almost don forthey sold greate quantity's yesterday of .both sorts, besides other goods; soc thatafter they aJe gon I may be in hopes of selling my goods if nothing comes downein the interim, for I heare there are two at Dickiscove. I have not sold any thingsince my last to your Worship, onely one halfe barrell of powder and the remainderof the sheets, for there has been noc trade to speak of since before yesterday. Justatt my closeing up of the letter I received one from your Worship and Councillwherein I was ordered to procure one barrell of pitch and one ditto of tarr, which Ihave don out of one of the ships that is here , but would not pay for itt beforeacquainted your Worship with the price vizt one barrell of pitch, l ounce and oneditto of tarr halfe an ounce, soe shall only stay for your Worships further orders. Iwould have sent this by the same bearer that brought yours, but hee was gon before I received mine, for I did not receive ill before 10 a clock this morning. [Towgood was at Accra, where he embarked John Winder's effects, on 9March 1683 (no.450); at Anornabu , where he took in com, on 11 April(no.346); and at Komenda , where he delivered goods and took in gold, on 21April (no. I 09). He re-entered Komenda Road on 8 May, perhaps to evacuate the RAC's factory there (no.112). By 11 May he was at Anomabu, where hedelivered a letter (no.341 ).] 556. Charles Towgood From aboard the Ann Sloope under Annamaboe fort, 12 May 1683 J would have writt to you this morning by MJ Thelwalls boy but that hee was gon before I came ashoare; however I am verry sorry that I have displeas 'd your Wor.ship with my stay att this place , which I could not helpe for twas 8 a clock before I came to an anchor here, I being becalmed which forct mee to itt, a little before which time 2 French men came to anchor off of Anishan, as likewise Captain Lumley. I kept a light for him till 11 a clock to come into the roade this morning (for twas calme all night). I see the two ships aweigh as likewise Captain Lumley, one of the two ships standing to windward and the other to leward, but presently the ship that stood up tackt and stood downe again e and Captain Lumley be ing taken astayes, was forc't to stand up, att which time the Frenchman was almost aboard him with a red ensigne but our King's jack (with which hee tooke all the ships), and presently fired a valley of small shott and three great guns with shott, att which time Captain Lumley answered him in the like with two pateraro's and some small armcs and then the Frenchman fired about 8 or l O guns shou and all as likewise about some 3 or 4 valley's more of small shott, which carried away Captain Lumley's foot of his mai ne say le out of the bolt rope and as I beleeve kill' d Captain Lumley, for I presently see the ensigne struck halfe mast downe and the ship yeilded to the Frenchmans boate which presently went aboard of her, and soone after Thomas Amamaboe came from him to mee and told mee to goe under the forte, which [I] was ready to doe before but could not for had noe wind, but I sent ashoare a note by him to Mr Thelwall to send mee off some great and small canoes, which hee did, which towed us in under the forte, where wee now lye, and presently I see the Frenchman take the two interlopers without fireing a gun, the one being Captain Summervill the Scotch man, the other Captain Lowes brother Thompson. I likewise understand by the Blacks that they tooke a Dutchman up to windward and left the men ashoare at Succondee. I suppo se the bigges t of the two ships might have about 28 or 30 gunns, being well mann'd to sight. I only stay here for your Worships furthe r orders, for itt will be in vaine to goe before the Frenchman be passed by Accra, which I beleeve will be in a day or two. Not elce alt present to informe your worship of (though I wish 1 had not this). 557. Charles Towgood From aboard the Ann Sloope under Annamaboe forte , 15 May 1683 These few lines serves to acquaint your Worship that yesterday, there comeing a ship into Anishan roade from leward, I thoug ht itt convenjent to send a canoe off to her to know what shee was, fearing itt was one of the ships the French had tooke, which att the returne of the canoe I found to be soe, but not in the custody of Frenchmen but return'd againe to the right Commander, Captain Summervill , of whome I received a noate sign'd by himselfe and Captain Thompson. which note was as followeth. After my sad usage, with the loss of all my provisio ns, sayes, goods &ca, I am arrived with my men severly punished att this place, acquainting you that Captain Lumley ly's at Daggue desperatly wounded himselfe, his ship disabled for want of sayles, all his provisions, water &ca taken out, CaptainThompsons ship taken and carryed cleare away, hirnselfe and most of his men onboard mee. Soe hopeing that there was a canoe dispatcht away that day (that I was taken) downe for Guydah to advise Capta in Low and the rest of them of thesepyrates , that they be provided to receive him, for bee threatens to surprize them andhath taken Age nt Pearsons tender and doth force the master to tell him every ships force, and alsoe doth say that Capta in Lowe hath a gold chest aboard for theCompany which they are resolved to have.50 These are the verry words I received from Captain SumrnerviU in his note, which thought convenient to inforrne yourWorship of. Not eke but stay for your Worships orders what to doe. [Towgood was at Accra, delivering goods, on 22 May 1683 (no.455); but thenreturned to Anomabu on 29 May, leaving there on 30 May, after taking on more firewood (nos 346, 510).] 558. Charl es Towgood From aboard the Ann Sloope in Accra Roade , 3 July 1683 Your Worship and Councills letter of the 28th past I received by the bearer hereof;and as to secureing the Royall Companys sloope, I shall take all the care im.maginable by runing in as neare the shoare as possible, upon first sight of thepyrates; for I doe not intend to move from hence till I am certified they are passedby, or till I have furth er order from your Worship. However if I had a desig ne toweigh, to doe anygood upon ittI could not, the currant runing soe strong to lewardand the weather calme. The night after I parted from Cabo Corsoe, I was taken with a voiolent ague and feavour which continued with mee every day till Sunday last,since which time I have not had any thing of itt, and hope I sha ll have noe more,althoug h I am verry weake and cannot gett anythi ng in this place to helpe mee, theDocter haveing nothing to give mee. Mr Hassell informes mee that your Worshiphas ordered mee to take in his slaves, which I designe to doe, but if I have a longpassage up, as I am afraid I shall (because of the calmes), I shall want water, haveingbut 4 hogsheads aboard. Not elce to informe your Worship of, but hope the newsthat Mr Groome writes to your Worship is not true, 51 for I cannot heare any thingof itt here by the Dutchma n nor of the canoe that brought itt. 559. Charles Towgood From on board the Ann Sloope in Accra Roade, 11 July 1683 Your Worships and Councills letters of the 7th and 9th instant I received, the one by the 2 hand canoe the other by Captain Robert Young, and did my endeavour to follow the orders of both, for I had both the gold and slaves aboard and was gott out of Accra roade when received that by Captain Young, and according to orders I weighed and went into the roade againe, where I now lye to attend him, but expect to sayle to morrow night, Mr Hassell embarqueing with mee (whoe complyed with his orders in all things),52 att which time I hope I shall have a windward currant, which oppertunity I shall not lett slip. I have on board 12 marks , I ounce, 5 angles, and 2 tacco's of gold from Mr Hassell, and 4 men, 8 woemen, and a girle slaves .53 [This last Jetter implies that Towgood intended to sail from Accra back to Cape Coast Castle (where Hassell was to be delivered); but by 8 Aug. I 683 he had reached no further west than Amisa (no.466). Later in the year, he went east to Whydah , where he took in slaves, and from which he departed back for Cape Coast in October 1683.54] The Merchant's Adventure , Commander John Groome [Groom e had presumably arrived on a different ship, which reached Sekondi in February 1683, but was reportedly 'in peeces', and was presumably aban.doned (no.534). He was then given command of the ketch, the Adventure (or Merchant's Adventure), for a voyage to the east: on 29 May he took in com at Anomabu (no.346), and on 12 June he was at Teshi (no.456). David Harper, who had served in the RAC factory atKomenda in 1682-3, evidently accom.panied Groome in the capacity of factor.] 560. David Harper From aboard the Merchants Adventure Ketch att AJlampo, 30 June 1683 Your honours of the 28th ditto I have received, and am sorry to heare of the pyrates returne upon the coast, but hope God will preserve us out of their unmercifull hands. As to an account of our proceedings here, be pleased to know that wee had noe trade to windward of Accra, and what wee had since was most at Tishue. 55 All the goods sold for gold are 15 pieces sayes, 3 perpetuanoes and 8 Guyney stuffs, amounting to Mk2 lo Sa Sta, the which money Mr Groome hath sent up per bearer. There are 18 slaves aboard, which were puchast one with another for 5 pieces sayes, 5 barrells powder, I 05 sheets 7 pieces Guyney stuffs, 17 pieces course sletias, 12iron barrs. Wee arrived att AJlampo 2 dayes agoe (expecting better trade then toWindward), where there are slaves to be purchased but they rate them att 7 and 6pease per head, me.n and woemen, vallueing our goods noe higher then att CaboCorsoe, soe that there is little hopes of doeing any good except the prizes beadvanced. Alsoe the Portugueze is here. whoe buyes all up alt the Blacks rates withthe best of goods. The goods most desired here for slaves are powder, musketts,good sayes, tapsells, allejars, sheets and sletias. 561. John Groome From aboard the Marchant s Adventure Ketch att Allampo, 30 June 1683 Your honours of the 28th of this instant I received and by the whiteman in the 3hand canoe, which am hearty ly glad to heare all is well at Capo Corsoe but am verrysorry to heare that the pyrate is to windward againe, but being forewarned by yourHonour s letter doe fully resolve to burne or put ashoare before l will be taken byhim. According to your honours order I have sent by the whiteman in the 3 hand canoe what gold I have taken, which is but little itt being 2m lo 8a 8ta. Thewhiteman seeing itt weighted and sealed itt, being upon the Royall Companysaccount, and as for the trade wee have had, has been verry small, till wee were pastAccra, for wee had not tooke one ounce of gold till wee came to TisaJI [sic], where wee found but small trade for gold and slaves, for they houlding them att such dearerates that my purchase of slaves is but small, there being but 18 in number. Thegoods that purchast them are 5 sayes, 5 barrells of powder, 17 course sletias, 105sheets, 12 iron barrs and 7 Guyney stuffs. I being in hopes of haveing a better tradealt Allampo then f found to windward, I made the best of my way downe, where Idid arrive 2 dayes agoe, where I find that there is slaves but they houlding them upatt such deare rates that wee cannot purchase any but for powder, for they vallueour goods art noe dearer rates then they are alt Cabo Corsoe and att them rates theyhold their slaves att 7 peazes and 6. I am certainely inform'd by the Blacks that thislast night there was a Dutch canoe passed by from Ardra, whoe gives account of 2 English ships being taken,56 but the Dutch escaped. I find but little encouragementof staying here, therefore doe God willing intend by the first oppertunity up toAccra, where I doe hope I shall have further order from your honour to advanceupon the price or to come up to Cabo Corsoe. The goods that are good here and theusuaJI commodity's as good sayes, powder, tapsells, aJlejars, good musketts, fine sletias. 562. John Groome Allampo, 9 July l 683 Your Honours of the 7th of this instant I received, which I am heartyly glad to heare that the news of Ardra is not true, 57 and likewi se I shall use my great care and diUigence in preventing all pyrates surprisa lls. I have used my best endeavour to gett up to Accra ever since the I st of this instant, but by reason of a streame setting strong to leward and noe land breeze have been rather a looser than a gaine r, although itt was this day I being under sayle standing into the shoare when the canoe came aboard, I being some 4 miles to windward of Allampo. And while I was standing in, the Portuguze waigbed and made the best of his way for Ardra, bee purchaseing some 70 or 80 slaves att this Allampo. but the rates hee gave was verry greate, hee giveing for a woeman slave 7 peazes, which was little under 2 sayes, and 2 sayes for a man, likewise advanceing upon all other goods. I shall give your honour account att my retume; I made itt my business to know the reason wherefore hee did soe much advance upon slaves above the Companys price, his answer was hee gave not above 7 pcazes 2a for a man and 6 [peaze] l angles for a woeman, consider ing he bought the sayes to windward for 14a and other goods verry cheape. I finding the currant to continue to Lcwardand the Portuguze being gon, Mr Harper and I did consult what to doe, and did think itt the best way for the Companys interest for him to goe ashoare and see wheither they would lett us have slaves att your honours rates or noe, if not to take my first oppertunity to gett up to Cabo Corsoe according to order. 563. David Harper From aboard the Adventure Ketch at Allampo, 9 Ju ly 1683 Your honours of the 7th instant I have this day received, in answer whereof please to know that since my last to you r honour wee have endeavoured our ullmost if possible to have purchased some slaves for the Royall Compan y att this place, but itt proved in vaine by reason of the Portugueze paying such unreasonable rates, for his lowest prizes were 2 sayes, 4 tapsells or 3 perpetuano's per head, whereupon Mr Groome hath don his utmost to gett againe to windward, but the leward currant being strong and land breezes but small, have gott not above one leag ue to wind.ward of Allampo. While wee were this morning under sayle the Portugueze tooke his departure to Ardra, haveing carrycd some 70 or 80 slaves from this place. Upon receipt of your honour s have resolved with Mr Groome to stay here some dayes longer. In the interim I designe ashoare tomorrow to see if possible I can purchase some slaves alt your honours rates after the Portuguze is gon, and if I can doe noe good Mr Groome will according to order take the first oppertunity of a windward curr ant to gett up, without which the ketch is like to gett but little ground . Att my comeing ashoare shall learne what goods are most in request here andadvise your honour accordingly att my retume. [On 22 July 1683 Groome was at Accra, taking in wood and water, andintended from there back to Cape Coast (no.464).] 564. David Harper From aboard the Adventure Ketch in the roade of the Oystershell Bank,58 5 Aug. 1683 Your Honours of the 3d Instant I have received, but am sorry wee did not know yourhonours orders that wee were further to leward. The goods most in reques t to lewardof Accra and all Allampo for slaves are powder, sayes, tapsells, sheets and someallejars and this I am verry certa ine of, haveing been 3 day's ashoare att A11ampo,but could not buy one slave, the reason was that our powder was gon before andthe say's soe verry much damnified that they did not goe off there, and for thetapsells they would not take less then 4 peeces for 1 slave. There is now 32 slaves aboard, but the currant goeing strong to leward and all the provisions for the slavesexpended, Mr Groome thought fitt to come up him selfe that bee might know yourhonours further orders, haveing with him the money in cash and an account of thegoods that are disposed of, and if ill should please your Honour to order the slavesashoare, sendi ng downe a cargoe of sayes, powder, sheets, and allejars I doubt notbut wee shall purchase a cargoe of slaves that will answer yoUJáhonours expecta.tion. 565. John Groome Annamaboe, 8 Aug. 1683 This last night haveing received a receipt from the Bumboy of32 slaves, I doe findthat 4 are mentioned as old, wherefore I confess that one is worse then I expected, and as for the men [blank] is verry young. Therefore humbley begg your honourwill consider the low rates I was constinted to, and if any of the slaves doe notanswer expectation your honour will pass ill by, and for the future shall take greatecare to buy none but what I shall be welJ satisfied will answer your honours expec.tations. I doe understand that my mate is to be cleared to come to Cabo Corsoe,therefore I desire that your honour will assist mee with one hand more in his roome, for 1 doe intend this night or tomorrow morning to sayle. 1desire that you will pleaseto send mee downe brandy for the voyage, on account of the Royall Company, oran order whether I shall charge as much as I was allowed last voyage. 566. John Groome Accra, 24 Aug. 1683 Yours dated the 22nd of this instant I received, and according to order I have dispatcht up Mr Harper by the first oppertunity. And as for the slaves I have on board is 4 woemen, I man, besides 1 marke, 4 ounces of gold; for att my arrivall att Barracoe , the sea being soe greate I could not make noe greater dispatch in my watering and wooding then I did, but did use my best endeavours to bring downe the Anguina's: which day they came downe Captain Draper came to an anchor in the roade ,59 which was a greate hinderance to mee, for had not bee came downe, my purchase of slaves had been a grete deale more then they are, and when I came downe to Accra I was encouraged by the Cabasheers of the Dutch Towne to have both slaves and gold, which fell out to the contrary, for the same day the traders came downe , old Cabasheer Will[s] sonns fell foule of one of the Whitemen, which Captain Young endeavouring to bring the man in, that first gave the abuse, bad one man k.ill'd, and since noe canoe will come aboard of mee , and Captain Young does require mee to continue till hee receives a letter from your honour. 567. John Groome From ashoare att Allampo , 15 Sept. 1683 Your honours of the 4th of this instant I received this day, being ashoare att Al.lampo, useing all the endeavour that possible lyes in mee for the purchase of slaves according to your honours command, but Allampo is nott the place that itt has been in other times, for if a man can have 3 or 4 slaves one day hee must waite 4 or 5 more before hee has one. I have now on board 25 slaves, there being 11 men, 11 women , 2 boyes , 1 girle, and doe hope by the next windward currant to be comeing up for Cabo Corsoe with 50 or 60 slaves in. Not elce to acqua int your Worship but that slaves are att very high rates if good. 568. John Groome Allampo, 18 Sept. 1683 Since my last letter from Accra I have had noe oppertunity of sending to you, but the 14th of this instant, being ashoare att Allampo received yours dated the 4th of this instant, the man comeing by land with itt, and by the same bearer I sent your honour a letter, giveing you account of my proceeding in trade and what slaves I have purchased in men, woemen, boyes and girles. And att present am ashoare useing my best endeavoure for to answer your honour s commands. I have aboa rd 28 slaves, there being 12 men, 13 woemen , 2 boyes and l girle, and may purcha se more woemen but I doe forebeare because I would have them bring one man with one woeman. I am in greate hopes by the foll of the moone or the next windward curra nt to be comeing up for Caho Corsoe with 50 or 60 slaves in or more. As for my proceeding downe to Allampo contrary to your comm and, was upon the ac.count of purchascing of slaves, for the re is none to be had att Ningo but what comesfrom thence, and I did not purchase a slave ashoare. And Allam po is [not] the placethat itt has been in other times; for the slaves I first purchased, the man that souldthem sent his men with the goods up in the country for the purchaseing of moreslaves, and are not come downe as yell, but I am in hopes that this weeke mayproove better then the rest of the time has. Not else Loacquain t yo ur honour withbut that slaves arc att verry high rates and specially them that are good. 569. John Groome From aboard the Adventure Ketch, Allampo Road e, 29 Sept. I 683 Yours of the 26th of this instant I received, which accordingly to your Honours commands shall use my best endeavour to the purchaseing what slaves I can in mycomeing up. I have now aboard 45 slaves but not according to your honours desire,for men are verry scarce and especially those that arc good. I was in hopes for tohave had an oppertunity for my getting up this full moone , but the currant has noewayes abated and as for land breezes I have had none, whatever there is to wind.ward, I beleeve the wind has tooke a Iese to blow att S.West and constantly a vcrryhard gale soc that I have broake my cable noe less then 4 times: not clce to acquaint your honour with but wiJI take all oppertunity's in getting up. [Groome eviden tly set out back for Cape Coast, but got only as far as Accra,where he died on 29 Oct. 1683 (nos 474-5).] The Unity,Commander Thomas Draper [Draper arrived at Sekondi, apparent ly from the west , so perhaps from Eng.land, on 8 July 1683 (no.8). On 11 August he was at Anomabu, where helanded goods (no.361).) 570. Thomas Draper Unity, Barracoe, 25 Aug. 1683 Yours came to my hand the 25th of this instant, and am veny son-y to hear e of thesudden alteration, not forgetting to retume your Worship thanks in minding of mce.As to affaires here, Atta staidc here till the 24th and then tooke his journey for thecoun try and carryed Captain Quow with him, promiseing to be downe againe aMonday next. Jlee hath ordered that the boores shall not trade with mee, till heecomes out of the country. lit lookes as if here will be but small encouragement asto Negro's, hee importuning mee to sell my staple commodytys for gold, which I have denyed him. They stand for 7 peaze for a woemen. Powder I doe want. I have purchased but one slave as yett and are most woemen here alsoe. Captain Groome gott 5 here.60 Atta sayes you promised to trade halfe money, halfe slaves. Pray per next [tell me] where[= whether] I shall trade for money or noe. (PS] Atta is angry hee forgott. 571. Thomas Draper Unity, Barracoe , 29 Aug. 1683 This is to acquairit your Worship of my bad success here, and how I am deluded along by Atta from day to day and noe hopes of any slaves. Herc is but 2 att this time that I have seen here, and one they will not sell without powder and the other hee stands for l say, 3 brawles and 2 barrs of iron, but Atta has spoyled mee in telling the people how goods goes there all the Castle, beate ing downe mine and endeavouring to raise the price of slaves. I doe think to be at Mumford , before the returne of the canoe, but I would willingly have your Worships orders what to doe, for here is noe abideing for slaves. Here is now Atta and Captain Quow have been up with the Queene and shee hath sent downe to cleare the place att Wyamba.61 I may take a little money if I would sell goods for itt. I begg your Worships leave to goe to some other place or to come up, for which I shall waite your leisure. These people waite the coming of interlopers; that's the cheife of their discourse. 572. Thomas Draper Accra, 13 Sept. 1683 Yours of the 2nd instant I received, and according to your Worships order I am now att Accra and find that slaves are ve1Ty hard to be gott, likewise by reason of the late desturbance,62 that I gott but 8 as yett and to goe any lower [along the coast] I doe not intend, for Captain Sheares lyes in sight and writes word hee has gott but one slave since hee came there. That the next morning I intend to waigh and spend one weekes time more att Barracoe and then to returne to your Worship, without further orders comes to the contrary. [Draper left Accra road for Beraku around 15 Sept. 1683 (nos 470-1 ).] 573. Thomas Draper Unity, Barracoe , 16 Sept. 1683 Yours received dated the 14th instant, and I have not slipt any opertunity when I had itt, to acquaint your Worship how affaires stood with mee, and if I had, itt had been a greate negligent in mee for soe doeing. I am now come to Barracoe and they doe promise to helpe mee with 8 or IO slaves, how true itt is cannot tell but will stay one weeke to see the event of itt, and then make the best of my way to your Worship. Itt cannot be expected that where the factory's are and soe many ships comes, to gleane much after them. The slaves I have received on board from Captain Young att Accra the 24th [sic: = 14th?]. This morning I am makeing the best of may way to your Worship. I have purchased but 12 slaves. The canoe could not stay, forct to send this letter. [Draper reached Anomabu, presumably on his way back to Cape Coast, on 1 October I 683, and took in com there (no.371).J TRANSATLANTIC VOYAGES The Edgar, Commander Charles Bowler [Bowler was at Anomabu, where he picked up oyster shells, presumably for use in Cape Coast, on 11 February 1683 (no.210). Having presumably called at Cape Coast in the interim, he was back at Anomabu on 25 February, as reported below, to embark James Nightingale (earlier RAC chief factor at Komenda and Accra), who served as factor for his voyage until May. Robert Holling s, who had served with Nightinga le in the RAC factory at Accra in 1681 (no.396), was probably also a locally-based RAC employee serving temporarily on Bowler's ship.] 574. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 25 Feb. I 680/1 I have according your Honours and Counsells order delivered your letters to Mr Thelwall and Mr Hassell . Mr Thelwall will deliver mee the sheetes ordered both from Annamaboe and Agga. Captain Bowler came into this road about 2 a clock. The Captain wants bagges for his corne.63 [Around the beginning of March 1681 Bowler supplied goods to the RAC factory at Anashan (nos 120-1), and was subsequently off Egya, which he left on 3 March (no.382.J 575. James Nightingale Wyamba, 9 March 1680/1 Accordinge your Honours order [I] delivered the 5 hand canoe in all hast to Mr 