X WINNEBA Winneba ('W ionebah' etc.) is 20 km east of Tantumkweri, 62 km east of Cape Coast. The RAC had an establishment here in the 1670s, but this was abandoned in 1679; an attempt to reoccupy it in 1681 was abortive! However, the English claim to the place was maintained: in 1682, when it was thought that the French might attempt to settlethere, it was asserted that Winneba was a 'privileged place' for the RAC, and again in 1687 that it 'belong[ed] to the Royall Company' .2 A factory was re-established in August 1693. References to trade at Winneba in the Rawlinson correspondence in the 1680s relate only to the purchase of slaves, but in the 1690s gold and corn as well as slaves were traded there. The principal hinterland suppliers of gold to Winneba were the Akyem ('Accim', 'Achim' etc.), on whom it was said the factory's trade 'depend[ed] wholJy' (no.1127). From 1694, however, trade was also opened with the Akani ('.Arcany') (nos 1083, 1090). Winneba belonged to the kingdom of Agona ('Anguina' etc.). This was at this time ruled by a Queen, named Tituba ('Tettuba ', 'Tutuba', etc.). She is said to have been the widow of the preceding king, and ruled as regent for her son, the heir apparent;3 by the 1690s, however, the son was evidently himself adult, and is mentioned as sharing authority with her, with the title 'Prince' .4 The situation at Winneba was complicated by the competing claims of Agona's neighbours. To the west was the kingdom of Akron ('Acronne' etc.),5 which had fought wars against Agona in the 1680s, but by 1693 was reconciled with it and joined in soliciting the English re-establishment at Winneba. An even more powerful player was the kingdom of Akwamu ('Quamboe' etc.), to the north.east, which also controlled Accra. Akwamu had defeated Agona and captured its Queen in 1689;6 although she was evidently free again by 1693, Akwamu apparently continued to claim authority over Agona. At any rate, it asserted an interest in the Winneba settlement, and was involved in the negotiation s with Agona, Akron and the English about it. Akwamu was generally understood to be opposed to the English establishment , presumably because it might divert trade from Accra. There were recurrent fears that it might send forces to destroy the English factory, but in the event no such attack took place. The Winneba correspondence also reports on events in neighbouring countries , including recurrent tensions between Akyem and Akwamu; the Komenda wars of 1695-6, in which forces from Akron took part (no. I I 06); and the Akani-Denkyira war of 1698, in which forces from Agona participated (no.1165). 1065. Leonard Jefferyes 7 Winnebah , 16 Aug. 1693 The Queen has sent up a canoe upon her accompt desireing you to send down the surveyer & people to worke to build the fort , for if you do not, so far [ms. 'for'] as I understand, she will goe up againe to Anganna , then there will be nothing done, for there is nothing done but she must be with them, and her people lye att her to goe up againe , perswaiding her that you will send nobody down to build, & for these [they] are such a lazy sort of people that they do not care for working, for the great palavering that the Accrongs and they had is come to nothing, for they would have a pawne from the Queen for the bringing oyster shells to the place where we intend to build. They pretended great matters at first, so long as rumm held, they brought down not above 4 or 5 boats of shells, and the Queen had such a parsell, if you do not send people to fetch them you will have none brought down. The shells lay a great way off,8 they w[o]uld doe nothing without the Queen doth goe along with them, she can do nothing by compulsion. The rum is spent, and if you do not send more here will [be] nothing done. We have about 5 sloops full of stones and about 9 boats of shells. I did think to come up to acquaint you about all these concerns , but the Queen told me that if I came up to Cape Coast she would goe up to Anguanna, and if she doth it will be hard getting her down again . 1066. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah, 30 Aug. 1693 Meeting with an oppertunity of sending to Quansoe Croome,9 and supposingmy co n10 would end up a canoe about the latter end of the month, thought fittto lett you understand of our arrivaU on the 25th instant, where the people was. very glad to se us and imediatly dispatched messengers up into the country tocaUdown the peopl to come and worke, for by our long stay11 they began to bedead hearted, fearing we only kept a white man here to keep the possession, asthe Queen told me when I went to give her my hand. She and the Kinge ofAcroome, who came two dayes after, give large assurances of their assistancesso soone as the rest of their associate come down, which they say will be in aday or two. In the mean time the Queen employes them few she hath in bringing stones, whicb worke she undertake to performe herself with her Anguinapeople, the Acrooms for shells, and the Prince with the Winnebah people forwood, so that hope in my next to give you a faire accompt of our proceedings. Inthe mean time shall use my utmost diligence in uniting tbe people, there haveingbeen Jong feuds between the Anguinnas & Acrooms, 12 but their greatestdiferences are accomodated, fitishes taken on both sides. Here is but one palaverto be decided, and till that be done the K.ingeof Acroome will not sett his peopleto worke, which I hope will be effected this day or tomorrow, the Queen haveinggiven the Kinge the reason, and staid only for the offender to make satisffaction,who is just now come down. I am forced to be present at all their talks, so that Ihave not had time to make such diligent enquiries as l would about canoe . Here is a man has undertaken to make me a 5 hand, 7 hand & 9 hand canoes. 13 I could wish the people were all so forward as the Queen to promote the worke, thenhere would be no fear of wanting anything. Here is a fine parcel! of stones ready& about 9 butts of shells, so that if they work but one day at shells we shall haveenough to make a little k:ilnefor a beginning. 14 We shall have ocasion for moreaxes and ome small things which hall advise at the foot of this. CaptainBradshaw sailed from hence on Sunday morning by break of day,15 and out ofthe 35 dales you were pleased to order me could find but 8, the rest being allexpended as he tells me, wluch have already made use of for 2 <lores,one for aroome for my tore , the other for the house, so that hope you will be pleased to 9. order me some more per first oppertunity. In a talk had with the Queen yesterday she told me that when my goods came she would order her people not to goe aborde interlopers, but that I should have all the trade. This she offered on her own accord, on my refusing to buy a slave from one of her people, telling him that where he laid out his gold he might likewise sell his slave, which he had done abord a Dutch interloper which lay in the road, & brought up the goods before my face. Yesterday in the morning came to an anchor another Dutch interloper, who fireing some guns but no canoe goeing off, he weighed againe in the afternoon. About beginning of next weeke shall send a canoe up to advise you of progress we have made, hopeing by that time to be settled to our worke. In the mean time desire you would be pleased to Jett the flagg be made, the Queen haveing asked me once or twice about it. I find they arc suspitious of the Kinge of Quamboes molesting us in our building, wherefore if you think jt convenient may send your stick up to complement him, by which means you will heare how he is affected.16 Here is just now come downe one of the BLr]affoese of Fanteenc, 17 he came and gave me his hand but hath not as yett told his business, Quo saith he is only come down to throw me ackee.18 Pray pardon my rude writing and pass by all tautologies, being in hast. 3 or 4 long crows, some axes such as we brought down, anchors to fetch water for our lime, 2 maules , a door case 3. foot wide & 7 high from inside for the gate, an hour glass or 2 houre rutto, a sive for the lime. 1067. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah , 8 Sept. 1693 I wrote to you by way of Quansoes Croome, desireing my cousen to forward it. Afterwards gave you the need.fullin one to Mr Platt, but was then so strained for time with the p[a]lavers we had here that must beg your pardon for the rudeness, as also the tautologies therein, hopeing Mr Platt has been so favourable to me that after the perusal! lhe] commited it to the flames.19 l have now a little more leasure to compose myself, although yesterday had a very sharp plavers with the Kinge of Acroms and some of the Anguina Cabbosheers, who sent Quo to me to demand a hundred bendys, without which they said their people should not assist us, which did not a little startle me, to se their fair promises comes to these tennes, but finding the Queen was not among them [I) went imediaty to acquaint her therewith , who l found lying upon a matt and as she said indisposed (which the more rearuJy belived because she had been cupped that day). There was with her three of the prime Cabbosheers, to whome I had no sooner made known the cause of my coming, puting them in mind of their promises both to yourselves by their mesingers as al o to me in their many talks, telling them withall you had by reason they were so pressing to you to settle here taken of the people from other places where the inhabitants would give money for your protection , but they would not give me leave to proceed in what I had to say, the Cabboshers rising from their seats aid they were a hamed to hear any further, the Queen bad[e] me not molest my selfe, and that what she had promised should be pe1formed, whereupon she sent one of the Cabbosheers which were with her to ask the Anguinas by whose instigation he had sent so many messengers to Cabo Corso to fetch the whit men, and if they were not ashamed to comence such a plaver now. They would have huffled it off upon the Kinge of Acroome, but he denyed it a well as they, saying be never de ired any thing but a cloth, to which the Queen me senger made an wer it was not a time now to speake of that, but when the for wa up and gunn planted thereon, the which I ashured h.irn he need not doubt of, so that one plaver vanished. The Kinge of Acrome rising up gave me his hand that he would peak no more of it, telling me that it was gone wi[th] the wind, o which I replyed that such gusts were able to blow down forts, whereupon all was turned into a laughter, & he promi ed before all the Cabbo heers that his people should goe to work on Munday to dig the shell and gett them in a readyness, and that on Tuesday I should have them brought to the fort, beging withal[ a flask of rum to drink with them, the which I readyly consented to, but with this provi o, that they should have no more till such time they settled to worke, which was agreed on by all so that I hope all rubb 20 are over, and that our worke will goe on smoothly, for if we can but settle this I reckon the hardest of our worke is compleated. The shells lying at so vast a distance from us, being upwards of three miles, makes the people shun the worke as much as they can. The Queen pares no paines to forward the worke, and i.s therefore gone thi day to the oyster bank, with a resolution as she tells me not to return till she hath accomodated all things, which so oon as is effected and that they bring u shells [I] shall send a canoe with advice. They say it will be on Tuesday, but I have been so often deluded with fair promises that I know not how to trust them. As for wood and stone it lyes nearer to us, so that we shall not want workin[g] on the latter, of which we have a considerable quantity ready at hand and they are bringing day ly, but in a short time we must be forced to goe to the rocks to breack them, for which worke we have not one capable, wherefore the surveyor desires you will let him have Hary the Bomboy, with 5 or 6 slaves which ar at Dickes Cove, which said Harry knows are fitting for that work, that we may have som ready broken by such time these are worked up which we find up and down in heaps, so not to have any delay we are resolved to run up two flankers with all expedition to secure the footing we have, and the rather by reason the Queen informes me the Quamboes are gatheri ng men together, she hath sent out her spyes to hear news. The surveyor thinks it convenient (with your approbation), both for ornament as also for expedition, to turne the corners and make the windows and doors of brick, for the stone takes them up a great deaJe of time in picking them out and preparing them, wherefore if you like of it would have 50 or sixty thousand sent down with all expedition, for he begins tomorrow to lay the stones, and hopes by next Saterday night to have one flanker three foot above the foundation. He is likewise at a loss for somebody to temper his morter, being forced to put one of the white men to doe it, wherefore desire he may [have] a fellow which they call Guner sent who is at Cabo Corso. Here is a couple of black bricklayers come to offer their servis, one of them was at building of Annamaboe and they say is a good workman, it was them two built Captain Quansoes house.21 I have not as yet made any bargaine with them, refering them to the surveyor for his approbation and your order for their entertainment. We have lime enough for 5 or 6 dayes ready burnt, and if the Acrooms keep their words we shall be able to sett another small kilne on fire either Frid[a]y or Saterday, so that the bricklayers we have will give the more dispatch. I hope in 2 or 3 weeks time to have a flanker capable to bear guns, which makes me desire you will be pleased to order some in a readyness against that time, for it will be both an incouragment to the people here & also a terror to any one who hath a mind to oppose our building. We do not think to run it up to the top but to the first story, that it may be defencable. We shall be extreamly put to it for deal bords, haveing expended the eight Capt. Bradshaw put ashore for a dore, a table and a levell. The necessaryes I wrott for in my last desire you will send per first opportunity, as also 3 iron barrs to make cuntrey hatchets for the people to cutl wood for the burning our shells, some being more desireous of them then our axes here. Here is a smith can gett them made. PS, 11 Sept. Be pleased to Jett the smith make 4 small trowells, 4 small hammers, some small wedges to fasten our axes handles, 3 or 4 wedges for breaking stone, a flag stafe which Capt. Bradshaw may spare if he please, he haveing one on board which though he pretend s is for a top mast will not serve for use and besides [he] hath a spare top mast. This was intended by the Briganteen, 22 but she went out of the road before could send a canoe on bord, but this oppertunity presenting & haveing it writt thought it fitt to expose it to your view, humbly begging pardon for all faults. I shall send a canoe tomorrow, being the 12th instant, which should have sent sooner, but stay to se whether the Acrooms will performe their promise, tomoITow being the day limited, so shall not trouble you farther at present, but beg pardon for being so prolix. [PPS] I have sent Quo to the oyster bank with the Queens messenger to tay there to come along with the people . I wi h you could lett the tick remaine a little longer or send one of the old ones down in liew of il, by reason I dayly use it sending about, but if I know you had more urgent occasion for it and desire to have it no occasion whatever should hinder me from sending of it, which your first advice shall command. 1068. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah, 12 Sept. 1693 Mr Bloomes canoe 23 touching here gave me this oppertunity of sending one to you I had wrot some dayes before , being designed by the Swallow Brigantene, but prevented as gave you to understand, which mighl very well have stoped this canoes coming were it not for the small things wrote to you for, haveing little or no fresh advises to give you. We began our worke on Saterday, I mean to say in morter, haveing before laid a very good foundation, and have run one flancer three foot high. The two black bricklayers advised of, the smveyor hath tryed, & one whereof he finds to be a better hand for this touch [=tough?] worke then any he hath, white or black, both for worke and quick dispatch, the other he sayes is but indifferent, but we must have either both or none, for they will not worke one without another, which will be no great loss, for we can make him serviceable for one worke or other. I have not as yett made any agreement with them, staying for your orders, as also to have a little more tryall of them . We are very much in want of trowells & hammers for bricklayers, wherefore desire you would if possible send 3 of each by this canoe and give order for the makeing 3 more to be sent by the first oppertunity. What crows, axes or any of the rest of the necessaryes advised of are in a readyness or wm be in a day or two, be pleased likewi e to send us, for our workmen begin to come in very well, every one showing themselves forward but the Kinge of Acroome, who hath faiJd u againe this day, but if he doth not come tomorrow, the Queen is resolved to goe on Thursday with her own people, so that I hope the disapoyntment will not be much. We are very much putt to it for water, being forced to fetch it a good way up the river,24 but so soon as our people are all come in we must separate a gange [ = gang] for that worke, for which would desire you would furnish us with what anchors [ = ankers] you can. I shall be in want of liquor in a little time although have bought two quarter cask of rumm, the which do not thin.k:e to charge the Company. At my coming first ashore wa forced to send messengers round about the countreys to bring down the Cabbosheers, most of which carried a flask with them, and besides visitts from the great men of the adjacent countreys, who came as they pretend to settle the countrey, that traders may come down, of which they give me great hope s, and are dayly pressing me to send for some goods, these visitts are very expensive and distroy liquor, for a man must seeme a little generous to them at first, beside s the dayly expense amongst the worke people. The three qua1ter cask[s] I brought down with me, either by long lying or ill practices of the coopers, wanted much, two of them being halfe out and the other wanted above a third, as both Capt. Jefferyes and tl1e surveyor can satisfie, so that of them I had not two full. I should not have troubled you with this relation but to lett you understand I have been as frugall in my expenses as possible, according to the old proverb of loosing a hog for a halfepenny worth of tarr.25 I have sent you up the carpenter, being lame of his hand , which as soon as is recovered be pleased to retume me, being in great want of him. PS. Pray fail not to send an hour glass, for we have dayly palavers with the white men. 1069. Nicho las Buckeridge Wynebah , 21 Sept. 1693 Yours of the lS'h instant I received, accompanied with a parcell of necessaryes have received [sic], and shou'Jd not have troubled you so suddainly but that am forced to it by the Queen, who I can with no argument cliswaid from the following demands, viz a piece of saye for a cloth, with somthing for a bre[a]st cloth, with 3 or 4 strings of rangoes to come round her wa[i]st, and a string or two of corrall to hang round her neck, a good cl[o]ath for the Prince, as also for her Braffo and the Kinge of Acroome , with 10 other inferior cloths for Cabbosheers ofBarricue, 26 Mumford, 27 Anguina, Wynnebah & Acroonne. I have done my endeavour to perswaid them to lett it alone till the fort had been up, but all is to no purpose. They promise me if that complyd with this there should be no other demands. The 10 may be ordinary ones either of pintadoes, perpetuanoe s or what you think fitt, but the Prince and other two if that [you] have so much red cloth to spare and wold please to give them thereof, I know not but that it might help us very much, for they are the principall men on whom our business depends , the Accroom s for shells, it lying in their country, and although as formerly advised the Kinge of Accroome had promised to send his people for shells yett to this day he delayes, referring us from day to day , and may be plaineley perceived [waiting] for his cloth, he haveing told me so once in a palaver when [he] demanded 100 bendys. The reason the Queen is so pressing to have these things is because she must goe up to Anguina to adjust some matters between the Accims & her, whjch as am informed is concerning trade. She hath sent the Prince to tell the young men to come to worke, 28 which she leaves to him and her Braffo, to be imployed as I shall direct, & hath desired me to Jett Jack goe along with her,29 that he may hear what palavers she hath. The cloths for the Anguina Cabbosheer she takes along with her to distribute to them there, but Lhe rest she is resolved give away before she goes, and then will appoint everyone their worke. The Barricu people are imployed at present for shells & the Mumfords will be here in a day or two, the women and children being already come, they designe to remove at once. We goe on prity shorty[= surely] with our worke, haveing one flanker within 3 foot of our first story, it being already above 8 high, wherefore de ire you would send down by the briganteen 4 wall plates. 2 of 20 foot and two of 12 foot, with 6 peeces for joyces, which the surveyor would have sent of their full length , that he might fitt them here. If we stay not for those things in 10 dayes or a fortmght at farthest we may be able to mount our guns, which will be very wellcome to the countrey people, for they are very apprehensive of some disturbance, although I cannot hear they have any fresh advises or any cause offear from the Quamboes , the Queens nephew being lately come from thence. 30 The two black bricklayers which formerly advised of will not worke unless you will allow them 3.an per month each, I mean the 4 weeks, wherefore pray lett me have your advise . I am forced to make use of them at present by rea on 2 of the whites have every other day a feavour & ague. The Queen will not stay above 10 dayes , and doth promise to bringe down a considerable quantity of money with her. Here is 6 or 8 bendys already down , most of which for powder, which most [ms. 'must'] crave after, but the Queen will be for sundry sorts. So soon as I can gett the flancers covered shall keep a continuall fire in it to dry the walls, designing to lay the most part of my goods in it, although have made up a tore roome in the thatched house I live in.31 There are 2 peeces of planks at the Hill, which the surveyor designed for the guard roome, they if you would be pleased to spare them would do us a great kindne in makeing a platforme for the guns. PS. We are in great want of all materialls for scaffolding, wherefore pray afford us what assistance you can. We had but 8 deale boards at first, and never a door nor table, & for ropes we have not an inch if it were to hang ourselves. When the goods come pray send some Welch plain , for they are much inquired after. Pray send likewise a Little hare [ = hair] for covering the flancers. I have made an enquiry about the bell but can hear nothing of it neither by Capt. Jefferyes nor canoe men.32 1070. Nicolas Buckeridge Whinebah, 2 Oct. 1693 I have nothing of novelty to informe you of, expecting Captain Quo down from Quamboe in a day or 2, who I hear was very well received & hath made a good palaver. This is cheefly designed to accompany one of our white men, who is taken so dangerously ill that I know not what to do with him. He is all the carpenters we have, if it suits with your conveniency desire another in roome, although a black, it would be to the Cornpanyes interest, for l am in hopes to suply the fort with most of the timber that we have occasion for, designing tomorrow to goe my selfe into the woods. By said Quo you shaU have a better accompt. In the meane time would desire you to cast away all suspicion of the Acrooms & Quamboers joyning to cutt us off, being well certified that if any mischeef is designed it comes another way & not from the Acrooms, they haveing lived slaves so long to other nat ions are very desireous to have a fort bui!t,33 & for what I can find will not be wanting with their assistance. We have gott us one flanker ready for them I wrote you for, & had not the raines prevented should have had another above ground. Here is above twenty bendyes of money ready in the town against goods come down, the which they would depos ite in my hands , nine whereof I am forced to take, belonging to the Prince, it is most for pouder and matchlock musquets, but sheets, perpetuanoes, sayes, blan.ketts and others are required, but for pouder & armes had I never so much could dispose of them. The Queen her self wants a 100 matchlocks. PS. Pray send per this canoe some bale ropes for scafolding & deales by first oppertun ity with the rest of the necessaryes desired. 1071. Nicholas Buckeridge Whynebah, 6 Oct. 1693 I shall not trouble you with an accompt of the Kinge of Quamboes palaver, his man accompanying this, whose anger I hope your wisdome will find an expedient to appease, or by the stickes sending to and fro gaine so much time as to gett guns upon two flankers, one whereof hath been ready for three peeces I wrott for ever since Saterday last, the other goes up with all expeditio n and in tenn dayes doubt not but to have it to its hight. The Anguinas , whether out of fear of Quomboers or the desire they have to have a fort, work very willjngly and I believe they will do their utmost endeavors to proffit us. They bid me not fear, for if the Quamboers doth [come), they are strong enough to encounter them, by reason they are at present devided amongst themselves, which if it be true the King of Quomboe will be the easier accomodated. 34 These people here buy all the pouder and armes they can lay their hands on. There is not a hip any where nigh them but that they send off, which l do what in me lies to hinder, but till we have force can do nothing . The Queen promises that when my goods come none shall go off. I am unwilling as yett to have any clifferance with them , not knowing upon what grounds we tand . If you are designed to withdraw us pray lett me have secrett notice, for I fear they will be unwilling to lett us go and may play the rogue, so that I would send the best of my things away before the Briganteen comes , if that goes forward and [you] can spare the Briganteen to let her lye here 3 or 4 weeks time, it would be for the safegard of the goods you send by her, for by that time I shall find whether their promises be reall or feigned, and whether the money they brag of will come down . I have no rum left to give them that carry stones, therefore if you go forward must send some speediJy, for drames must be given to encourage the workmen. They worke with great eagerness since Quo come down, so that if you can make up the breach between Quamboe and Anguina you will have nothing to fear. The Queen preá e me to send for more bricklayer , which if they continue as they begin we could employ. I have by the surveyors advise entertained those two Black bricklayers, but cannot gett them under what formerly advised, if that go forward and [you] can spare any workmen for a month or six weeks it may forward the building, for I am afraid in a short time they will have expended that provision they brough[t] with them and then will be returning to fetch more, they say they have enough for 2 or 3 months. A carpenter or two would be very necessary, but the young fellow I sent up knowes no more how to handle an ax then I do. Here is good woods about five miles off where they say ther i very large trees, which so soon as have any time intend to go survey, but we must be forced to cutt them to their sizes and square [them] there, for the better bringing them down. In the mean time we shall want them which I wrote for, for the more expeclitious covering our first flanker, for the rest shall do my endeavors to provide them here. The Queen was intended to have sent up a Cabbosheer, but afterwards desired to lett Jack go, because he had beard all palavers, and deferrs her going up into the country till such time he comes down againe. This news of Quamboe makes her very vigorous to forward the building. They sent to roe just now to intreat you to lett her have more bricklayers , she will see they shall not want stones nor shells. I wish yould spare us 10 more slaves for fetching water, for the country people will go but once a day. We shall want those slaves from Dicl<ies Cove , for if we go on as we have done shall quickly gett all the stones that are broaken to our worke, so that the Anguinas will have a pretence to be gone. They worke both night and day, when one Cabbosheers men leave off anothers begin. As for the bell I can bear nothing of it. Capt. Jefferyes saith he never sent any canoe thether, and neither he nor Quo knows anythinge of it so, that Mr Bloom must send some better directions. PS. Jack is sent up by our Queen and is able to give you a perfect accompt of all transactions here, as also whether the King of Quamboes man gives the same palaver to you as he did here. [PPS] We want 100 the larges[t] spikes that are in the store. 1072. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah, 20 Oct. 1693 Meeting with soe convenient an opportunity thought fitt to lett you understand of our pr[oc]eedings, which altho' is not according as I could wish must trouble you with it, or being come almost to a full stop without your assistance, for the stones which Capt. Jefferyes & Quo advised you of, after haveing taken of the top, finde them to be soe small and such trash that the surveyor cannott make use of them for the outside of his work, so that we have been forced to pick up stones here and there where wee could finde them, which hath been a great hinderance to us, and wee haveing noe other remedy left but to go to the breakeing, the hardnesse of which and the few or noe hands wee have which understand the said worke makes it very tediou s, wherefore to give you the more expedition desire you would hasten down those stone breaker s which I formerly wrote for, as also the bricks, that wee may bee running up the Fort (I mean onely caseing it) till such tyme wee have stones broake to proceed with our curtaine walls, which I fear will take some tyme to effect by the progresse our slaves make, but indeede they are all novices, which makes mee hope when the old experienced slaves come wee shall make a better hand of it. You may assure yourselves wee will bee as saveing of the b1icks as possible, and if stone bee to bee had will not use a brick. I should have given you this advise sooner but that was in hopes to have found at the bottome of the heaps of stones fitting for our worke, and also rangeing the woods found that which they call the Old Castle, 35 where wee were advised should find vast quantitys, but after clearing of it was very much frustrated, there being nothing but a pittifuH waU of about 2. foote high and 2 thick, and this but on one side , the other being encompassed with a deep dry ditch, which you are very sensible could not afford us much stuffe. Wee have gott up two of our flankers and two of the curtaine walls almost to the first story, and the foundation layd quite round, soe that had wee had stone should have wanted the door cases , which at the foote of this hall have the dementions, that they may come down with the other necessarie , which the sooner you supply us with will bee the better for expedition. I have & will make itt my utmost endeavor to give you as little trnuble as possible, and should bee glad were I able to procure all things here, but when necessity requires hope you will excuse if wee continue breaking of tones. Wee cannott bee without a smith , for this hard stone make both crows and wedges un ervi able without they are new sharpened. I hope our palaver with the King of Quamboe may be near a period, for Captain Hansico and Amo had everything granted them by the Queen which you desired, and hath carried up one of her cozen to take fetiches. Wee hope may bee atysfactory. Shee gave a very fair palaver, and told the Kings man that when the Fort was up she would bee contented with what part of the ground rent his master shold allott her, hee being her uncle, 36 shee would put herselfe wholy into his hands, the which she desired him to acquaint him , but withall desired hee would hasten downe those supply of men which bee promised and that they might bee put into my hands.37 I fear they will bee a more trouble to us then assistance, by reason that in 5 or 6 day's after they come there victualls will be expended, and then if you would have them stay must find them come . The country people grumble very much that I have not dram to give them, in the roome whereof I am forced to give them palme wine . Wee had very bad sickness with our white men, all of them haveing had icknesse, and I feare shall loose evison, hee was taken the day before yesterday with a fever, yesterday was pritty well againe, but this night is taken speechle 'e. I wish you would send down some person to lett them blood, for they all linger extreamly, as also Capt Jeffryes, who is troubled with such a giddines e in his head cannott hardly stand . Mr Bloome sent his linguister hither about the bell , and with much adoe wee found out the person that brought it up, his name is Coffee Ariboy and lives at Lagoos.38 Quo knows the man, but John Le Grand 39 being present when was enquireing after it, told mee the canoe was oversett and the bell Jost, which if the man come hither shall not take as a ufficient answer. l asked John why hee had not told Capt. Jeffereyes of it before, his answer was hee thought the canoe men had done itt, but I finde they neither acquainted Quo nor Capt. Jeffryes with it. PS. A door case 3. foot wide and 7 high from inside, as formerly advised, foure window cases two foot eight inches within square, two ditto two foot eight inches high and l&. foot broade. These must have iron barrs fixed in them, being for the warehouse and the rest of the ground roomes. 1073. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah, 26 Oct. 1693 This day I had advice from Captain Hansicoe and Amo by one of their canoemen which came to mee from Barricu for cankie money that they had finished the palavera, but would not bee here till Tuesday next, which made me send away. This comes to informe you that all the people wee can make are not able to breake stone for our workmen, soe that wee stand still four dayes in a weeke. The country people are ready enough to bring them to us, but cannott bee brought to breake them. I am loath to loose soe much tyme, wherefore apply myselfe to you for a remedy, which hope that [you] wiU speedi ly afford, that I may not tire out the country peoples patience. Wee have now our 3dcurtain wall up within a small matter of our first Liear [=tier] of rooms, and had not these letts hindred us,40 should have begun our front. Wee are forced to leave gaps for our window cases, which makes our work show mighty i1Tegular. Pray if that [you] can by any means send mee down some rumm, for the expense that I am at in palrne wine almost distracts mee, as Capt. Jefferyes who is the bearer hereof can sufficiently informe you, and how to remedy it I know not, for the young men will not touch a stone till such tyme as they are sure of some thing to drink. I hope if you think it not convenient to send downe goods if [you] will supply mee with some money, for am forced to supply the white men with some money, as also the slaves, and knowes not what wages they have nor how their accompts sta nds, which should be glad to hear. Nevison departed this life on Fryday last, and the other two are infirme, and much want the advice of a chirurgeon. His remaines are so inconsiderable that I look upon the whole not to bee worth twenty shillings, here wee have them secured till you r further order. Wee have had two of our slaves run away, but the Queen sent out after them and hath taken one and brought him downe, but for their encouragement, as also they claime a custome, [I] was forced to giv[e] them that tooke him 4a. The other shall have tomorrow. I have turned him [i.e. the one recaptured] to work amongst the rest of them, by reason hee suffered soe much this time I beleive bee hardly will adventure a second, for bee had lost himselfe in the woods, and had bee not luckily been mett with might there have beene famished. I shall give you the advices more at large by Captain Hansicoe, in the interim referr you to the beare r. Surveyor advice Six girders for immediate use, of 19 foot Jong, of the smallest timber sticks you have of that length 2 small plates of 20 each 2 ditto 17 ---.2 ditto 12 ----) one of the thicke t pieces cut in quarters 2 ditto 10 -----) Pray send me a pair or two of Negro irons 3 maules 3 large crowes 3 shovells 10 wedges for breaking srone 100 of the biggest spikes, with other sort of nailes A canky women,4 1 and other slaves to fetch water. [PS] Since the writeing the aforesaid the Mumfords, whose turne it was to work, came to take their leaves , and pro1nised to bee downe by that time wee had sto ne for them. 1074. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah , 27 Oct. 1693 I here send you our two fugitives, being fearfull of them attempting the like againe, Lhat which I had given his liberty haveing been gott lurking in the woods this day. [PS]Pray send mee a pair or two of Negro irons, for fear of the like occasion. 1075. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnabah, 1 Nov. 1693 Yours of the 30th ultimo came to my hand s, and the same day Captain Hansicoe and Amo, but they have brought downe a fetieche along with them to bee taken by the Great Men of these parts, and are obliged by the King of Quamboe to see it taken, wherefore I cannott dispatch the great canoe soe soon as you desire and may expect, and beside they are obliged by the afore aid promise to the said King to tarry here till Monday next, to receive one of the Quamboe Cabbosheer s who is comeing downe to throw you acke, and likewise to see that these ceremonye are perfom1ed. Our Queen tayed here till Munday last, and then was forced to goe up, and as ill luck would have it was not gone above four houres before the arrivall of Captain Hansicoe and Amo. I have sent Jack after her to bring her downe , [or] if shee cannot come to send down those men the King of Quamboe hath nam 'd to take the fetichs , but have given him order if possible to bring her downe. I expec t an answer this night or tomorrow , but [the] canoemen pressing mee for their cankey money, I obliged them to goe up to you, telling them that I had nothing of the Companyes in my hands, soe that thereby had opportunity of giveing you these advices. I have given them 1oz already, soe that Mr Salmon 42 may see what is behinde. Here is 15 in all, Prince and them that here are willing to take it [i.e. the fetish], and hope the rest may bee the same. You are very sensib le these fetiches will not bee taken without the expence of liquor, and how to come at it I know not, for it is very unproble [= improbable] Portuguezes should come hither ,43 when you that have guns to protect them, 44 and where money is plenty cannot get it, besides it's very hard I must lend the Company more money for towards their building, which I hope you will take into your serious considerations, and if soe bee you cannot! spare a quarter cask, let me have a case to make an end of these palavers. For the workmen I can put them of with palme wine, although I fear the ex pence will be greater then if had greater [sic], but they will not touch a stone or any other work without a pott of wine. The surveyor tells me the white men are resolved either by night or by day to run away and goe up to Cabo Corso except they have their money at pay day, wberefor pray lett me know what their wages are and whether they owe anything out of it. I am already considerably out of pockett, [it] lying wholy upon [my] expence, and can take my oath I have not gained one era era since my arrival!. My accompts you shall have up by Captain Hansico & Amo. In the meanwhile if you would bee pleas'd to send me any money downe you would oblige mee. I have not at present any advices to give you more then that what have already done PS. All our maules, wedges &ca are much our of kelter [= kilter]. 1076. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah, 6 Nov. 1693 This day came here the Quamboe Cabbosheers with a great trnin, as also the chiefe man of Accroorn, 45 but I have noe liquor to ente1taine them but palrne wine. Some of the Anguin[a]s are come and the rest wee hourly expect. Soe soon as they are alJ come wee shall proceed in takeing the fetiches, and then shall dispa tch Captain Hansicoe and Amo with all speede. You may believe it is not my desire to keepe them here, it being very expensive to mee. The great canoe, launching her yesterday to fetch said Cabbosheers of Quamboe, 46 wa unluckily spbt upon the rock , and without a carpenter be ent to mend her is made uncapeable of swimmeing up. I was forced to hire small canoes to goe in her roome , and shall be forced to doe the like to send them to you. Captain Ball47 hath bought a 7 hand one which will much help u in sending up the people. This canoe putting ashore thought fitt to give you this advice, as also to desire your acceptance of 10 Guinea hens. PS. Here is a ship come into the road ju st now, the Commander advised desired [sic] mee to advise you that in six dayes hee should bee ready to depait for Holland. Hee sent hi boate on purpose , and says he gave hjs promise to Franck48 that hee would give you advice. 1077. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah , 16 Nov. 1693 Wee have at la t finished our palavers and the fetishe taken, which I hope will bee sati factory both to you and the King of Quamboe. It was not delayed through any unwillingness of the Anguinas, but that the Queen and Cabbosheers were makeing up a difference which happened in the country wherein was some blood shed. Captain Hansicoe & Amoe, who departed from hence this morning, can informe you of the whole, to whome referr. Though they were detarded some tyme it was not wholy rnispent, for I sent for the chiefe Cabbosheer of Accroom, one who hath more power then the King , and made up all palaver with him, who hath promi ed to bee down on Munday with his people to bring shells. I shall not trouble you with any further advices , expecting the Briggantyne down dayly with tho e necessarie formerly wrote for, which are what wee have occasion for. I hope our building will now goe on to your content, which shall bee my utmost care to forward. The afore aid Cabbo beer s will tell you how high wee are and the wants wee are in, especially of timber worck. The Mumfords are at la t come, & worke well either for hell or stone, but am forced to give them every day 8 taccoes for palm wine, which they rather chu e then two flasks rum. The white men here have their healths very ill, one of them which is the best workman haveing kept his house this ten days, and the other ever[y] now and then troubled with a fever and ague. I . hould have sent tbe former up, but that expect the Brigantine , whose chirurgeon may give lhem some ease. If you can spare any others in their rooms, should bee glad, for wee have never a good hand now left to work. 1078. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynneybah, 7 Dec. 1693 Thls serves chiefly to accompany the bearer, William Johnson brick.layer, who bath been almost for these two months troubled with a lazey distemper, or to speake more plainely sick of the work. It seems it is of a distemper hce used to bee troubled with both at Cabo Corso Castle as also in his apprenticcshipp, and whether his long dissembling with God Almighty hath provoked him at last to afflict him, or that it is a fitt of the old not well carried of, I know not, but am apt to beleive the latter by reason it takes him at such sett tymes. All Suodayes and dayes which wee cannot gelt stone to work hee is abroade, and at his sickest tymes eats heartily and will swill palme wine till he splitts. I could insist upon many other tokens of his dissimulation, but am not willing to trouble your serious cogitations with such importunitycs. The other man I have is at present Jame, but will in a sho1t tyme bee able to goc worke againe. In the mean time wee goc on with our blacks, who are more then able Lo keepe all our stone breakers imployed, but you must needs think wee goe on very slowly, haveing but seaven men slaves left for all manner of works, haveing had the misfortune to loose one in brcakeing stone, a piece of the rock falling downc upon him. Capt. Bradshaw arrived here on Munday was a fortnight, by whom received the necessaryes you advised of, but finde the brickes to come out much short, not exceeding 7500 who le ones and 1500 or two thousand batts at most. There was one bale of blankitts very much damag'd , 28th [sic] of them being fitt for nothing, likewise one case of sayes very ill colours and damnified in the folds by Jong lying. The rest of the goods as much as have opened proves very weU and hope will finde a markitt, but at present can se ll little or nothing, they haveing layd out their moneys in guns and powder and other Dutch goods, which as yett they cannot dispose of. Since my comeing downe here hath gone of above 100 bendys, most being for armes and powder. Soe soon as you will allow mee guns shall prevent it49 in a great matter with disgusting the country people, Prince and one or two more Cabbosheers arc willing to joyne with mee in it. J shall not trouble you with any further advice, you well knowing what our wants are, the which I hope you will afford to the utmost of your abi lityes, for it is pitty to have work dayly [=dally] and the dry times wast[e) a great pace. I wish I bad the happinesse of a days discourse with you, whjch I hope you will grant at Christmas. PS. By the returne of the canoe bee pleased to send mcc 10 or 20 iron barrs, for the country begins to build their house s aboute [the) fort and wants iron for their work.50 I have spared this man 14a 6ta on accompt of his wages, which bee pleased to stopp for mee. I could not even with him, not knowing what sallary he hath. I am soe miserably afflicted with the gout that must begg your pardon for my rude writing. 1079. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah, 14 Jan. 1693/4 I am orry mu t trouble you with soe unexpected a palaver, but as must intreate your a istance therein am forced to itt. Prince no sooner came on shore but hee secured three Cabo Cor o men under pretence of an affront received from Occubah Braffo,5 1 who hee says seized one of his people with two leopard skinns and sword. As farr as I can understand bee is a Cabo Corso man who run to him [i.e. Prince] some tyme since, I mean to Great Ata his cozen,52 who hee hired, and is a pawne to said Occubah Braffo. I sent for him presently after the action, and would have had him release said man, and promised him would write to you and ee him have justice herein, but could by noe means bring him to an accommodation, altho I told him how ill you would resent it that hee did not make you acquainted before bee came downe. Hee sayes Captain Amo would not lett him, and told him you would not concerne yourselves with Negro palavras. Hee talked with very high at fir t, and nothing und r 70 bendys would content him, but since hee hears I have sent to make the Queen acquainted with it, and that shee is comeing downe, hee begins to bee asham'd of himselfe, wherefore I hope that shal make it up easily, but I desire you would bee pleased to lett the man be secured with the two skinns and sword. Hee stands much upon the afront, being his sword bearer, and complaines of his usage by Han ico and Amo, who he sayes was again t him in his palavra with said Occabah , but I believe it to bee nothing but a pretence in some manner to excuse himselfe. Ataboy,53 whose turne it is to come to worke, hath sent downe to mee to acquainte mee bee will bee here in 2 or 3 dayes with his people. The Mumfords I expect some time next weeke. In the meane tyme am removeing to our new towne. 54 PS. This should have gone by a Cabo Corso canoe, but hee went away and never called for it, since which Prince hath been with mee very ubmissive , and hath sent to release the Cheife of them 3, that hee may goe to Cabo Corso about the palavra. 1080. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah, 23 Jan. 1693/4 Your s of the 19th instant have received, but have done nothing in the palaver, Prince being gone up under pretence of bringing downe his people to work. Jack is come this day from the Queen, who sayes shee will bee here in a daye or two with great numbers of Anguinna's, soe that by the next hope may give you an accompt of our proceedings in the work. Here are messengers from the Accrooms, Fantine and Quanso, who waite her comeing to goe fetch their masters, to make an end of takeing feiteches . I wish it were once over, for I find it will be a vast charge expence for the Company to have all them great people downe, but it is a thing can no wayes bee avoyded. The Queen wouJd have beene here before this but that shee is make ing a cry for the Arcany Cabbosheer, who was to marry her.55 She hath sent to mee for my hammock, and likewise for a case of rumme, both which I have complyed with. Yesterday came hither a Quamboe Cabbosheer who calls himselfe King Bonnisberrees brother, and saith the palaver between him [ = Bonnisherree] and Addo is made up,56 and that the Cabbosheers which was with you will bee here on Munday next, but that as yett they cannott deliver the Danes Fort, 57 they haveing soe much goods in it, which they know not what to doe with. The canoe 1 told you off, they have brought downe, shee is a very good one and strong, but they ask such a price for her that I dare not medle without your advice. Their first price was 5 bendas, since which they are come to 5oz. I here send you both her length and breadth, by which you may judge shee is as tile [ = tight] as a cup, and I cannott see any defect in her. They would have money, but I beleive may gett them to take halfe goods, which is all at present, the canoemen being in hast to be gone. PS. Tsent the Company stick by the man that went with Prince s palaver, which I hear you have received. The Queen hath sent to mee for 10 or 12 iron barrs, and saith shee will bring downe the money with her, wherefo re if any opportunity presents supply mee with a few. 1081. Nicho las Buckeridge Wynnebah, 1 March 1693/4 This serves only to accompany the bearer John Braittaine [ = Brittaine] , who is taken very ill. I have paid him his pay here. I hope you will be able now to give roe a upply of workemen & nece sarie for the more speedy settleing this place. I am in great want of the garders the surveyor .laid out, having brought our worke up to the first story quite round. I have not Lime to enlarge alt present, being newly come from Acrome, where I was forced to goe to make up the differences there was between these people & them, as alsoe to provide shall [=shells], the salt pond being soe filled with water here that they are very hard to come at.58 I shall not troble you more at present, here being a canoe to depart tomonow, by whom if possible shall send my accompls with what else is needfull. PS. You must send downe canoe men to fetch the great canoe, as alsoe board to make seats. Here are no men will unde11ake to paddle her [ms. 'here ' up. 1082. icholas Buckeridge Wynnebah, 6 March 1693/4 The bearer hereof Capt. Jeffryes is able to informe you how our building goes forward , and alsoe the troble I have had ince I came downe with the country people, who would not give any assi tance unless they had something to drinck , neither would they give me time to end up a canoe to you, the whole country of Anguina being mett togather, as al oe the Acroms, [I] was forced to make it up with them rather than lett them goe up into their own country, and I beleive have done it cheaper than if you had sent them cloths from thence , for with this I have both contented the Cabbosheers , as also the soldiers, 59 both of Acrome, Anguina , [and] Wynnebah , soe that I doubt not but to have great assistance. I am sorry you have had such ill succe s with your brick.layers, but since it i oe we must hift with our Blacks. For John on, he is taken ill of his lazey di temper againe, and comes not on the scaffolds in a day or two ' time , and when he is there cannot put any trust in him, for my back is no sooner turned but his tools are out of his hands , which hows the Black s an ill example . These things very much streightens [ = straitens] me for time and gives me much troble, as I hope said Capt. Jeffryes will doe to me the justice as to acquaint you, that I may have either a careful! workman down or somebody to oversee the work, otherwayes mu t beg your pardone if am not soe punctuall in advices as would be and as you may require. My endeavours shall not be wanting neither in forwarding the building or in promoting a trade. I have sold, as will appear by accompts, upwards of four marks of goods, most of which hath been since my comeing downe after Christmas. The Queen brought down some Achims with her, who tooke away with her upward of five bendees, and causes [them] to be here in a little time againe with a greater um.me. She hath sent a boy up to stay for them, wherefore be pleased to lett me have a supply of sayes, for I have not piece s vendable, especially now here are soe many Dutch interlopers on the Coast, as also another bale of blanketts, for although I have some quantity by me the greatest part of them are damaged & the rest bespooke by the Queen, who stayes only for the aforesaid Achims. You may likewise send, haveing soe good an opportunity, some sheets, course sletias, tallow, knives, with a few l lb pewter basons, and hope by next shall be able to send you some of the fruite of the country. Perpetuanoes I have enough by me, they being not much enquired after, had I had sayes should not have disposed of soe many as I have . The Queen formerly sent me down four women slaves, and told me I might employ them as I did the Companys, and if they run away it should be on her accompt. Now since her comeing down she hath taken up goods for them, 60 but since they forward our worke in fetching water, which we fetch a great way, [I] doe not send them [i.e. to Cape Coast]. The abundance of raine which we have had up in the country hath soe overflown our salt pond that shell was very deficult to come att, but as God hath shutt on[e] part he hath opened another, for haveing made up the palavers with the Acromes, am supplyed with shell from them, who bring them to Apom,61 where I finde canoes to fetch them, which is as cheap to the Company as fetching them by the country people, the expence of liquor being very great, it employing soe many people, and besides through their neglect we have been forced to lye idle many dayes, which more than ballances canoe hire. If you [have] any old broken great canoes be pleased to order me one for said work. The Queen was very much displeased you did not send her a mourning cloth, her husband being killed att the warrs,62 which I excused as well as I could, but was forced to give her a piece of sayes to pacify her. We must keep in with her, for here is nothing done without her. She keeps her people hard to worke, and is resolved not to goe up into the country till she sees the Fort capable for to lodge us in. She is very pressing to have guns,63 which pray if possible comply with, for it will be a great while before the Briganteen will come againe. She hath told me often she ventures her life for the Company, and you will not send her any thing to defend her. She I must needs owne doth her endeavour, therefore if you think it convenient to send her in your names a good cloth with a screwed jugge with brandy, for she drinks no rum me, now it would very much encourage her. She doth not care to see Princes screwed jugg, and was very angry with me [that] I suffered you to give it him, she says it makes him too proud, soe that what ever you send Jett it be to her, and though you promised Prince and the other Cabbosheers a cloth lett it alone. He works very hard & cut all the wood for the k.ilne, but the Queen & he are greatt difference about the former palaver, with an addition of one or two more hath made here, which he Jett alone till she goes up. I have not further to enlarge att present. PS. We shall want the following necessaries: haire , a sheet of lead, nailes , deale boards both for scaffolds & flooring, some bricks , the stones breaking soe irregular we are forced to turne the peers [ = piers] 64 with them . 1 have sent up two crow & 1 wedge , which be plea ed to order to be mended & ent downe. Pray di patch the canoemen immediately , for they aU worke . 1083. Nichola s Buckeridge Wynnebah , 12 April 1694 Yours of the 17th ultimo by the Briganteen have received , with the good & necessaryes therein mentioned, and ane addition of three guns, in such a condition [they] are almost unserviceable, [they] want both smiths & carpenters work, which I am ill provided to supply them , besides there is neither shott , powder nor any thing belonging to a gun, which makes me presume the press of business diverted them out of your memory, not having any advice of them in your letter. I was in expectation by said conveyance to have received some deal boards for scaffolding, haveing informed you soe largely of my wants, but I find you are not pleased to give any encouragement to the worke, otherwise you would not have suffered me to be here soe long without a board . Pardon me that l am thu plaine in expressing myself, but it is come now to that pu h that I cannot avoyd it, being forced to lett the worke stand still, and only provide [blank] shells and tone against such time you can supply me. On Saturday last I had like to have spoiled two of the Companys slaves through the weakness of our scaffolds, being for the most part say case board , with old rotten canoes , with which I have run the worke to that height , being now in the lowest place up to the fir t story, and all the back near six foot higher. So soon a deals come that I can cover any flanker , I shall bave sufficient lodging for my white men in them, and doe intend to reserve one for my goods, being timorous of having soe great concernes under a thatch cover, for which work must desire you to supply me with some bricks. The bomboy was much to blame to reckon 5000 more than he sent, which the surveyor & all the workemen can te tif:ie to be true, with which now l could [have] made shift for the present. If you could spare the surveyor and with him what carpenters you have to come downe & lay the beams and fix the joices , you might have them returned in a small time , and then we might cany up our worke regular, and besides would forward us very much, for in a small time wee hall worke as farr as we can goe till this be done , soe that the bricklayer mu t tand still and look on the carpenters . Be pleased to consider, at whatsoever time it is done, mu t have a carpenter or two from you , and hope it may suite with your conveniences to spare them now. Will is a very willing fellow, and when is well doth not grumble at his worke, but he must have somebody to direct him. He is now laid up with wormes, as also five or six slaves more. By the great canoe wherein went Capt. Jeffreyes went up Grande Quacou, he haveing been sick ever since I brought him downe. I had told Abraham he should goe up by the first opportunity, which made him put him in without further acquainting me, by which means I did not advise you sooner, which I hope you will excuse. If he is not in a condition to come downe I desire might have Tom in his roome, who I left behind, [he] being gone with Captain Hansicoe. His woman is here, who importunes me every day to write to you for him. I have had all the Anguina Cabbosheers downe here for these twenty days, which hath putt me to a great expence of liquor, all my rumme being expended, and what is more could not content them, their demand s being soe unreasonable. They brought downe with them three quarteirs of young men of between 30 or 40 each,65 which worked very well for 10 dayes, but when I came to press the Cabbosheers to hasten downe the next quarteires they told me they must see what I would doe, and before any of them should come downe they expected every one a cloth , which were upwards of twenty, telling me what I had already given was too little for all Anguina. I find if we have any assistance from them it will cost more than it is worth, neither can I give any thing with safety, having had large promises when I gave the last money that noe more should be demanded, now they pretend that was only to one division, which is 3 quarteirs. When they found I wou ld not comply with them they endeavoured what they could to persuade the Queen to goe up, but instead of prevailing with her she rise up in a passion, and told them if they had noe shame she had, and since she had sent & fetcht downe white men [she] would not leave the place till she had performed what promised, and sworne by her fathers head [she) would eate new come & yamrns here, and to show it was her intention hired the Winnebah to roasar for her, which they have done considerably, and with that left them, who imediately departed to their habitations in the country. What the event of this will be I know not. I have been with her since to know what we shaJl doe, she bids me let it alone to her and I shall see she will bring them downe, and in the mean time hath sent her own slaves to come with all expedition, with whom, the Barricus & Mamfords [ = Mumfords] I shall make shift, having some stone left, but must desire you to send me 2 or 3 quarter casks of rumme , as also some brandy for the Queen, who drinks noe rumme. I wish it were once at an end, for every day b1ings a new charge with itt. The King of Acrom hath likewise plaied the rogue with me, putting a fetech upon the shell,66 for what reason I know not. The Queen hath sent to know the meaning, and suspecting it is for some more dashees hath taken the cloth you gave Prince at Christmas and sent him, soe hope we shall accommodate that bussiness, and in the meane time have some by me, enough to goe to worke when you send me scaffolding. By these their unjust dealing you may perceive what troble I have with them, they not being like the rest of the Negroes, who after they have once made up a palave r stands to what they have done. In Anguina I am plagued with the Cabbosheers, in Acrom the Cabbosheers are all friends and the King only plagues me.67 By my next I hope may give you a better accompt of affairs here. The Queen harps much upon her cloth, and indeed I doe beleive it would not be ill given considering, how firrne [var. 'farr'] she stands for the Companys interest and the great expence she is alt. She claims it as a promise made her man alt Christmas, as also a silver headed cane when the shipps come. 68 The say she sayes was a custome, being for a mourning cloth, which leave to your serious considerations, assureing you there shall be nothing wanting in me to bring the expence off as easy as possib le, acting for the Company as if it were my owne relations concemes. We have had both the Achims & A.rcanyes, the latter are most for English goods, the other requiring powder & arms, but the Dutch inter lopers lying soe constantly in the road doth much hinder me. By my accompts, which at the latter end of the month shall send, you will see what have disposed. In the rneane time if any oppertunity presents lett me have a bale of Welch plaines. I shall not be more large at present, fearing I have presumed too farr upon your patience. PS. Pray lett me have these following necessaries: nails of all sorts, some tarras, deale boards, bricks if possible. I have sent up to be mended or changed 3 crows, 3 wedges, l maull, 1 pick axe, I ades [=adze] , 1 axe. Our axes are most of them very much wome, wherefore be pleased to Jett us have 3 or 4 new ones. 1084. Nicho las Buckeridge Wy nnebah, 26 May 1694 Meeting with this opportunity of a canoe bound up, thought it convenient to advise l have received all things you sent both by Capt. Phillips,69 as alsoe the Briganteene, who the weather detained her[e] some time, the raines being soe violent and the seas running at that height noe canoe would venture off. I hope my worke hath not received much damadge, only one flanker, which I fear [I] must be forced to pull downe, the water having made a passage clear through the foundation. I have secured as well as I could the tops of the walJs by thatching, which I doe not think to pull off ti IL I see the weather settled. 70 In the mean time goe to provide stones, wood & shell against wee can worke, of all which doubt not to have sufficient quantities, having made up the palavers with the Acroms and [they] taken the fetich of the shell. Were the weather better, I could not worke, my whitemen being both sick, and the two black bricklayers lame with wormes, with eight other slaves. The Quamboers are up in arms, and we are advised intend to come this way, the Queen hath sent up to know the certainty, whose messenger we expect daily, the raines haveing detarded him, there is soe much water in the way that for these 14 dayes nobody could pass from Anguina to this place. I hope it may [be] but only these peoples fears,71 however if any oppertunity presents desire you would send me downe some shott, both for the great guns as alsoe small arms, with some thr[e]ad and twine to make carthriadges. The canoe pressing to be gone, crave leave to subscribe. PS. By this conveyance goes one of Capt. Bradshaws men, who he turned on shore for his refractorynesse. I would have had him take him on board againe, but he tells me he goes in danger of his life with him. I suppose he [ = Bradshaw] hath given you his crimes at large by this conveyance, wherefore shall not trouble, only acquaint he is the same fellow made disturbance here on shore when they came with the last bricks.72 1085. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah, 31 May 1694 This serves only to accompany William Johnson, bricklayer, who being soe extreemly ill & lame thought fitt to send him to see if you can afford him any assistance. Here is .a canoe bound up in two or three dayes, by whom shall send my accompts with what small baHance I have, which I hope will every day augment, when it please God to open the weather and keep Dutch interlopers from hence. The Queens messenger sent to Quamboe is not yett returned. Wee keep watch every night, wherefore pray send some shott for the gunns, as alsoe twine & threed for to make carthrages. I am now very bussie in providing shell, and am forced for the encouragement of the country people to goe myself to the oyster banke, where I beleive we have gathered above fifty butts. Pardon my abruptness and boldness of stile. [PS] Capt. Phillips sent this paper of [ = about] keys with his humble service to you all, which keys he writes me word he forgott. Pray if possible spare me a little paper, being put to very hard shifts. 1086. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah, 20 June 1694 I have nothing of novelties Lo advise you, having no certaine accompt of the Aquamboers. The fear which these people are in of them furthers me much in providing shell & stone, of both which I hope to have a large stock, that soe soon as the weather breaks up may regaine this lo t time, but wi h you could lett me have a carpenter if it were but only for a month, both to direct as alsoe to assist this black fellow, who is wilJing to worke but hath not that forecast 73 in him to lay the beams and contrive the staircase . For bricklayers, considering your necessities, shaU not press, only desire that when the dry times come in you would lett one that is a workeman come downe for 10 dayes to looke upon the flankers, which I formerly advised you was afraid had received damage. As for Johnson wbome I sent up, being lame, he may doe very well where there is other workemen, but wants as much directions as any blackman here , wherefore cannot rely on his judgement, and if I had my desire should rather have his roome than his company , he being such a quarrel some fellow [to] both whites & blacks. By this conveyance you will receive my accompts , which I have moderated as much as in me lyes, but doubt not in two months or three to bring them lower , for which reason I have discharged one of the free bricklayers, being but one indifferent workeman and very lazy. I assure you it would be much to my satisfaction could I find out any way to lessen the Company charge, knowing very well it would redound to my creditt, which in thi world i the cheif staff I rely on, but the many country I have to please and withal! the ill principalls [=principles] of the inhabitants considered , may I hope be a sufficient reason of my non abillity. It hath and doth give me noe small trouble to keep a union amongst them, for should they fall out and the Acroms joyne with the Aquomboers, which said [i.e. Aquomboe] King hath tryed all ways to effect, the Aquomboers would attempt to beate us from hence. The Anguina & Wynnebah Cabbosheer s are prepareing to go up to Acrom to take their fetich to be true to them and assist one another again t all enimie . The Acromes have been here and taken theirs. They are desirous I should goe along with them, but I have putt it off and shall only send Captain Quo and one anchor of rumrn. Soe soon as I can gett the carpenters worke fini hed shall runne up the front and two flankers and cover them with all expedition, which being effected shall not fear any of their palavers , it affording ufficient lodging for all our white men, were we twenty, and with one or two carpenters more may be finished in two months. You may have your carpenters againe in less time, for after they have laid the first floor this black fellow with their directions I hope may be able to lay the roofe. I have been to see some trees which are to bigg to bring down whole, but would make good joice s had I a two hand saw, and are not soe farr off but that may gett them downe without much troubl e or charge. Soe soon as I have the saw shall sett the sawyers to worke, the weather beginning now to open. I have not a naile in the Factory upon what occasion soever, which pray supply me with by the first opportunity, of severall sorts. The ballance, being 4oz 8a 4t, I send not up by this conveyance, it being a strange canoe, and besides am so plagued with interlopers since the Danes being at Accra, 74 who they say brings a com.mission to take all interlopers of what nation soever , that I know not whether shall take one era era of money before pay day. They sell their sheets to the Negroes att 12 & 13 for 8 angles, and the rest of their goods much att this rate. If any opportunity offers of sending downe hither you may supply me with four bales of perpetuanoes more, they being goods they have not aboard, but I am in no hast of them, by reason have one bale by me not opened, besides loose ones. PS I am heartily sorry to hear of Mr Platts & J'vlrRonans indisposition but hope the worst is past. 75 Be pleased to send by the canoe Johnson went up in some shott, threed & twine. By the aforegoing have given you an accompt of my wants, which if possible supply me with, for the bricklayers will have rune themselves out of worke before I can gett the joices laid. Since have received yours of the 13th & 17th instant , the contents of which I shall be very carefull to observe, makeing it my cheifest care to keep a fair co1Tespondence with the blacks. Am heartily sorry for Mr Johnsons rnisfortune. 76 I humbly thank you for the proffer of your assistance, but my malady is of that nature that at soe great a distance I fear can reap noe benefitt except it be in ane eme tick, which I shall be obliged to you for sending. I am almost in the same condition I was in att the Hill 77 with the dry gripes but only (thanks be to God) I reta ine the use of my limbs, although but weakly. For these four nights I have not had one hours rest, and find myself rather worse than better. If I am able, by returne of this canoe shall be more large. [PS] The Queen animates me very much, and bids me not feare the Aquomboers. 1087. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah , 23 June 1694 Since my last to you the messengers who the Queen sent to Quamboe are returned , being detained soe long [by] the waters being soe high . The news they bring i very good, her nephew comeing downe with them, who assures her the King of Quamboe hath noe designe on this place, soe hope wee shall meet with no molestation. The Cabbosheers of this place, Anguina & Acrorne I doe not much fear, they being all very desirous of having a Fort here. The Aclcims begin to be cloyed with powder and arm.es, and now run upon other goods. I sold two pieces perpetuanoes to one yesterday , who was only sent downe to see the goods, who says in six dayes time here will be a great many traders, wherefore desire you would upply me by the canoe I have att Caho Corso one bale of perpetuanoes , for this last bale doth not prove soe well as the others I had, severall being motheaten, and I would willingly have goods to please them , being the first time of their comeing. My gripes are very much abated but have left me soe weake of my hands that Thave much trouble to write, wherefore be pleased to excuse my rudeness. 1088. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah , 27 July 1694 Meeting with this canoe bound up have sent the crows &ca which want mending, desireing the smiths may goe about them immediately, that they may be in readiness against a canoe [I] intend up about the beginning of next week , by which shall send the duplicate you desire with my accompts & ballance . I have had a very long and tedious icknesse and am not yett able to goe the length of my house without help, but God be praised my feavour i much abated . 4 crowes, 1 shovel!. I woodaxe. 2 wedges. 1089. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah, 31 July 1694 My long indisposition hath rendered me soe weake that I am not able to answer yours by Mr Barter, neither give you the needfull , wherefore have sent up the Serjeant, who can informe you how the building goes forward, as alsoe what I want for immediate use. By him likewise you will receive my accompts and ballance, being mk3 4oz 7a Sta. Had I been able you should have had my June accompts in their course, but the ballance would have been small. My head swim , oe that I must begg your pardon. [PS] If you think it convenient may send downe a bale of perpetuanoes by the canoe the two slaves came in. I have sent another egroe lave. 1090. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah , 16 Aug. 1694 This is cheifly intended to accompany the bearer att the request of our Queen, who sends him up to recovery with your assistance of [i.e. from] a canoeman named Aquiessau, cozen to Doctor Griffin78 and now belonging to Peter, 1oz 4a in money and a woman slave, [which] she sent up by him to lay out for her, and either bring or send her the effects, but since he bath had the money, she never hath heard from him. She is unwilling to make fast about it,79 wherefore hath hired this canoe to see if she can gett it by faire meanes, which I hope you will be able to effect, that we may have noe further pallaver, and likewise she would be much oblidged. In one of yours you write me word the expences are soe very great that they cannot be allowed. I assure you I moderate them much as in me lyes, but our wood, stone & shells lye at such a distance that it employs a great many people to bring them to our worke, to all which am forced to give liquor, otherwise must be forced to doe all with our own slaves, which will be very tedious, for all that they can gett together in a month wee can work up in a fortnight or lesse. I hope my last accompts are to your content. For deducting the eight gallons per month allowed att all Forts where there is noe building, you cannot I thinck look upon it to be lavish, if I have any assistance at all from the country people , and as to the powder you object against I can safely take my oath I have expended more only in answer ing salute s of shipps comeing into the road. They all knew .Ihad gunns, and [I] know not how in civillity to deny tbeir salutes, unles I would appear some pitifuU rascally fellow placed here only as overseer over the workmen. I hope you will not be soe hard with me as to make it come out of my pocketl, the place affording both trouble & expence sufficient. Our Queen there is not a month goes over her head but drinks me out near two anchors of come brandy. In my last accompts you will finde the slaves pay to come to one angle shorter than formerly, by reason of the death of a Negroe woman slave who dyed some dayes before, being one of them I bought of the Queen. She miscarried about two months before, and never was well after, I cannot hear it was occasioned by any blows, bnt course of nature. Since which have had a worse misfortune, one of the Gambia slaves named Cbacnta, suspecting his womans honesty, after they bad left work tooke a knife & stabbed himself in two places in the belly, and would have done the same to her, had he not been prevented by the rest of the slaves. I sent for Capt. Towres Doctor, 80 who told me he lookt upon them [i.e. the wounds] to be mortal , for the undigested victualls issued out with the blood. However the Winnebah Cabbosheers undertooke the cure, but the next night after ( what frenzy I know not possest him) left his house & never hath been heard of since. I had another Gambia here who was sick att that time, and soe continued till about ten dayes agoe, when he gott up & worked with the rest of the slaves, but Friday night last he ran away, and was taken up at Quanso's croome. Soe soone as he [ = Quanso] sends to me shall send him up. I beleive the occasion of his running was cheifly to gett to his consorts 81 att Cabo Corso, haveing noebody to converse with. Yesterday came downe some Arcany men , one of which I knew, haveing traded with him when I lived att the Hill, he was a constant customer to Cabo Corsoe , he hath bought 20 peices perpetuanoes. He tells me they are trying to open a trade down hither, the way being stopped to Cabo Corso. 82 He desired me to send for more perpetuanoes, and tells me in 10 dayes they will be down again. I have 27 pieces by me, but they are most of them of that bale I formerly advised you of, wherefore if any oppertunity offers may send me downe two or three bales. I have not above 8 or 9 but what I don't fear of putting off, soe that I am in noe great haste. Here is a generall complaint that the iron & tallow are too deare, they say that they can have barrs at Accra at 2a per barr, and for tallow I cannot gett them to exceed 3a., att which price I beleive I could putt off a score. I am still soe weake am not able to goe out of my house. PS. I have sent up two women slaves. 1091. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah , 30 Aug. 1694 This serves only to accompany 2 women slaves. In a day or two shall send my accompts & ballance. 1092. Nicholas Buckeridge Wynnebah , 3 Sept. 1694 I have received yours , but canno t apprehend for what reason you should tax me with putting the Company to unnecessary charges, when I can take my oath on it have been more frugall than if it had been my owne concerne . If soe be you have a minde I should build the Fort only with our owne slaves, I am reddy to obey your commands , but if you thinck convenient (for the qui.cker dispatch) I should have the assistance of the country people, it is past my skill to make them touch either stones or shell without liquors. The expence which the Queen putts me to, which is considerable, I doe not charge the Company, knowing the lesser the charge the more repute shall gaine with the Royall Company , whose favou r & esteem hath been my endeavour to attaine ever since first came into their service, and would not now willingly loose for soe trivial) a matter as what is in debate. As for the powder you mention, 'tis nothing but what was allowed Dickies Cove when in no greater posture of defence than this place. 'Tis true their gunns were mounted on their flankers, which I could have done upwards of two months ago, haveing had one flanker finished and covered with bricks, and two more on which I could have putt gunns which are covered att their first story and were done long before the raines. If the Anguinas comes downe to bring stone according to my expectation & their promise I hope in six weeks to have the Fort fitt to lodge in and secure all the Companyes concernes, but when I have gott the walls to their full height must desire you to lett a bricklayer come downe to cover it, for the Blacks have not the agillity with them to cast the water as it should be, & Browne if he would worke is little better, but since the last pay day by no persuations [var. 'means'] can gett him to take a trouell in hand. His first demands before he heard the anivalJ of the snipps was 8a the pay day, and to be paid from the time you sent him downe, but since he is come more moderatt and desires but 6a, & doth not talke of the past time. I cannot give him any great charecter but that am willing to have one whiteman about the worke, his being here will not excuse your sending downe one to cover the worke. By the bearer you will receive my accompts, which I hope will be to your content both as to the charges as alsoe about the Ardah slaves. The ballance, being mks3 0oz l5a 6ta I have likewise sent you up. Capt. Towers & another interlooper lyeing in the road hindered me much, but the Dutch row frigatt 83 comeing among them I hope hath cleared the Coast of them. I have spoake to the Acroms about corne, they promise to bring me what I please. There is great plenty in the country, and if you have occasion for some old corne you may have it, giveing me timely notice. I am makeing a corne roome, which I hope to have finished in tenn days, for which desire you would send me 6 paire of hooks & hinges , small ones for windows and one larger paire for the doore. 5th[PS] September . Yesterday I received out of the Briganteen 100 blue perpetuanoes for accompt of the Royal l African Company. 1093. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah, 8 Sept. 1694 This is att the request of Prince, & serves to accompany a five hand canoe he sends up to you for sale. I profered him six pez for her but he expects mountains . I desire whatever price you make with him you would take the goods as they are rated to the Factory, by reason he hath reported here that I oven-ate everything and that att Cabo Corso they are much cheaper, which occasioned many words with the Queen. I beleive the cheif end of sending her up is to try the markett. By this send you a man & woman slave. 1094. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah, 17 Sept. 1694 I have nothing of news to advise you only Thad this former part of the month a pretty good trade and hope it will continue, haveing taken upwards of six markes, and doe expect a company of Arcanas downe on Wednesday or Thursday. They are now au the Queens croome, wherefore desire you would by the first opportunity send a supply of perpetuanoes, sheets, 1 lb & 2 lb pewter basons, with a bale or two [of] Welch plaines, and if you have any tapseiles, brawles or corrall lett me have a small quantity of each, being much enquired after here. Pray send the hooks & hinges desired in my last, as alsoe some nailes with about 3 dozen of staples for a canoe. PS. I have sent the 2oz I0a. 1095. Nicholas Buckeridge 84 Winnebah, 6 Oct. 1694 Yours of the 24th ultimo by the Guiney Galley, Capt. William Piles, have received, accompanied with a parcel] of goods, which for quanti ty come owt85 according to advice, butt suspecting one of the bailes of perpetuanoes opened it before Mr Rootsey 86 & said Captain, wherein found but one good thereof, the rest being extreemly damaged, [we] valued them according to the best of our judgement, as will apear by the inventories in Mr Rootseys hands, who is gon to Accra.87 I wish you had sent me another bale of Welch plaines , for I beleeve these will be gone before Satterday night, which if any oppertunity offers be pleased to supplye me with, as alsoe some iron, for I had noe sooner lowered the said commodity but it was alJ taken off. If you will allow me to take era era money or come for said perpetuaooes damaged, as alsoe for sayes and tallow, I doubt not but to dispose of some quantity to the Arcaneys , being sought for after by them, but [they] have noe Arcaney money to purchase them with. By this conveyance you will received my accompts and baJJance, being ml2 5oz 0a lOta, as alsoe another coppye of my August accompts which hope may be to your content, haveing endevoured to follow the methord you perscribed [= prescribed]. Wee have had very troublesome palavers hear, but as they noe way concern to the Companey business hear but the trouble they give me and expences upon the Castle, shall not trouble you with them, butt what cheifly detared the connoe with my accompts [was] as followeth. About three weeks agoe I had a hole cutt in my thacht of my house, & lost six halfe firk:ins of tallow, apon which l called the Winnebah Cabbosheers and Queen , demanding satisfaction. The Queen proposed to send up to Anguina for a fetche to be taken by foure boys, one for Anguina, one for Acroomes, one for Winnebah , and one for Fanteene, 88 on which it fell the countrye to make satisfaction both for the se tallow as allsoe some goates and sheep I had lost. In the meane time [she] desierd me not to write to you [ms. 'y1'] According[ly] [she] dispachted a boy, at whose retume the Winnebahs woold have had her brought[= bring] his said fetches owt into the markett place, but she desierd to make experiment thereof first herselfe privately, which weather she did or not (and found it to fall on the Anguinas, as is suspected) 1 know not, butt [she] would never bring it owt, tho prest [ = pressed] to by the Winnebah, excuseing it that she exspected Quansoe and the Accroomes Cabbosheers hear to meet the Anguana who she had sent for down to woorke, and at there comeing it should be tried before them all, in which time I happened to have two ewes more stollen owt of the Forte where I had locked them upp, and being a raine[y] night traced the footings of them halfe way to Anguina, soe that it was the Anguinas that did it. The Winnebah, Accroomes [and] Quansoe being likewise come, whent to her and told her it lay now apon her to look owt the theives and make the white men satisfaction. Her answer was she had sent to Anguina about it, and if she could not heare of them she would goe up and let the white men retume to Cabo Corso Castle, [by] which answer you may perceive I am not likely to have satisfaction withowt the theives are found out or force be used, which latter course as it can be taken at any time shall at presant let alone, for fear of putting a stop to the woorke. Quansoe was very plaine with, her and told her it was a revenge apon the Anguinas but noe satisfaction to the white men, and as she had sent for them she ought to protect them and see noe harme came to them. They are now expecting the return of them sent in searchj who if bring noe news, and that she holds her resolution of goeing up, shall accomodate the business as well as I can, & dissemble my intention untell such time as I have force able to compell them to a compliance, for if she goes up through sham[e] of looseing her good name and esteem amongst the whitemen, which is her pretence, though I beleve it is the least occasion, the truth being to prevent makeing satisfaction, all concurring she ought to doe, what will not shame and revenge prompt that sex to do or act? I desier your speedy advice in the matter, and if you think fitt a more rougher course best, desier to you would sent down Captain Hansicoe immediatly to demand satisfaction in your names. If she comes away on Munday wee may gett her before the Cabbosheers parte, most of whome are against the Queen & Anguinas. Hear is and will be by Munday night most of the great men of Acroome and Anguina to meet Quansoe. I shall not trouble you further at present, if any novellitye happens shall advise. PS, I have sent two negroe men slaves. Pray order the Bomboy to send downe the Negroes irons I sent with the fonner men slaves. 1096. Nicholas Butteridge Winnebah, 15 Oct. 1694 At the request of Captain Quansoe I trouble you [ms. '/'] with these few lines to accompanye two Negroe men whom he is desirous you would secure for him, which if theire friend doe not speedily come to redeeme them [he] will take upgoods for. He helped me in the palaver I had with Anguina, which is allaccomodated and satisfaction promised and likewise promoted the building, soecould not deny his request, the perticular hall give you at large in a day or two. 1097. Nicholas Buckeridge Whinnebah, 3 Nov. 1694 Meeting with an oppertunity of a cannoe bound up with a corpes of a boypawned by Occubah to William the carpenter, and wanting both perpetuanoe &sheets, thought fitt to give you advice, that noe opportunity may be slipt ofsupplying me, hear being two parcells of marchants already come and the thirdexpected on Tue day next, besides other small traders. I shall end up myaccompts and ballance on [m . 'one') Munday or Tuesday next, with the moneywanting in my last, as alsoe a man slave, and should have done itt sooner buttthat I am in a hurry, whatt with the traders and Muffords [= MumfordsJ have nottime to write. I am not quite owt of neather [i.e. perpetuanoes and sheets], buttam come to my last bales of perpetuanoes , which is bespooke, and hath proffersto Jaye down two bendyes in my hand, which he will forfitt if he doth not takethem away in two or 3 dayes att furthest. You may Jikewi e send somepintadoes, for Capt. Piles haveing sould ome heare the people begin to incleafter them, 89 as alsoe a few lead barrs, with what powder you can spare . The connoes sudding [= sudden] departure and reason aforesaid will not admitt meinlarge, but in ha t. [PS] Bee pleased to send by the fir t opportunity the two crows and a maule Isent by my boy, as alsoe nailes. [PPS] Gentlemen, sence the seailing of this there are traders come downe, whoare ready to tere [= tear] him in peases for perpetuanoes, sheets and powder ,wherefore if noe hip come downe pray dispacth in a connoe and lett not theconnoe come away empty. 1098. Nicholas Buckeridge Whinnebah , 3 Nov. 1694 I have recevied severaJl of yours, the Jast being accompaned with 100 iron barrs.As nothing of novelty to informe you I deferred puttin[g) the Companey tocharges of cannoe hier, the mony being soe neer expired. The defferance I had with the Queen and the country of Anguina have made up, said Queen & CheifeCabbosbeer havein[g] takein itt upon theire selves, and promised in 14 dayes Ishould be sati[s]fied. After we had adjusted the matter I desiered they wouldconsider of the Forte, and after some small debate they agrede the Muffords should be sent for to comindeal [= commandeer], 90 being 4 quarters, each to be hear seven day[s], then to be released by the Anguinas, and them by the Aqua[n]soe people, 91 and them by the Accoromes [= Accroroes], which if they performe I doubt butt once round will finnish the Forte. One quarter hath bin heer and have woorked the seven dayes very well, the secon d came yesterday and this day fell to woorke, soe that I have and shall have a good parcell of shells and stone beforehand, sence my bricklayers are come to this disaster. Antony Brown I am forced to send up to gitt cured, and Quasso by an accidentia ll fall brook his armes, soe that now I have onely the Black I hiered here and the oldman which I can say are anything of woorkemen, vaggamonions 92 serving onely to fill in, and that with good looking after, to which make butt small redanse [= riddance] 93 in these thick walls, whereof if possible pray supply me with two in there roomes, for I feare these country people, seeing such a quantity of shells & stones ready as there will be in a little time I shall have, will be neglectfull of there woorke, and to bring downe the Cabbosheers againe will create a new charge, which be pleased to take into consideration. This' meeting of the Cabbosheeers have put me to a great expense, which I shall give you in a role [= roll] 94 aparte before I bring it into my accompts, to see what you are pleased to allow, being unwilling to have any more dispute. They all whent away highly contented, and swore to me I should not want stone or shells to finnish the woork, which I am the more induced to beleeve by reason Quonso [= Quanso] and they Anguinas have already sent some come heather to be in a readyness against theire people comes. Likewise I am informed that the Anguinas have allotted which quarters shall come first. If you can help me at this push I doubt not butt to have it finnished by next month a[t) least. You may withdraw some of your woorkmen if these accidents had [not?] happended . I must desierd you to send one downe to instruct these I had in laying the bricks to cover the roof, that I might not have it to do over againe. I could have had a good part of the forte ready to cover, butt I left of woorking on those thine [sic:= thick?] walls, which took soe muc h lime, and [there are] few stone to goe apon the front flanker, which devours more stone, to have as littell lye in f[ull] view of the Maneford [= Mumford], who are afetching stone, as possible can. The carpenter was taken sick two days sence and still keeps his house, complaineing of great paines, soe that now I am quete distitute, and whe re he in perfect health he is not able to keep t[r]acke with the brick[ layers], bes ides wants derectio ns to fite the starecase. His azds [=adze], ax and sow [=saw] is as much owt of order as himselfe, wherefore I have sent the two latter up that you may see I complaine not withowt a cause. By thi convenience you will receive my accompts and ballance, being mk9: 6: 1: 8. You will finde my exspence to be great, but in consideration of the woorke that have bin done 1referr to Mr Rotsey and Capt. Piles to relate , and the extrordinary expence on the Cabbosheers. I hope you [ms. 'is' ] will not think amiss that the coon[try] people conteniew their assi tance. I hope in a month or six weeks to have stone [&] shells enough to fi_nnish the Fortt. Seace my fir t comeing downe I have never soe much beforehand, wherefore I am the more conserned to ee the e accidents that (have] befallen my woorkmen . I fear the carpenter will not be able to woorke in a small time, which will be a great disapointement withowt you can supply me with another in his roome . By Satterday night hall have my third flanker ready to cover. The Queen is gone up into her one [=own] countrye. Att her departure 1 thought she would have quarrelJ with me because I would not sati ffye her greedy averice. She sent to acquainte me of her jomey, and withall to know with what I would take my leave of her, whereupon I sent her a piece of perpetuanoe & 3 sheets for her cheife boys, which at the present she seemed to accept very kindly, but at night, I noe [=know) not what possesed her, [she) returned (them], aying it was to littell, which so aggravated me that 1 took them and locked them up, and swore she should have noething more. To afront me stripped her selfe of the cloath she wore, which was that you sent her, and sent it by one of her women, her Cheife boy refu eing to bring itt, with this message that if she had the rest of the things the English had given her [she] would returne them, but when she came into the country would send satisfaction. Judge, Gentlemen , weather this and what she told me was not provocation suffecienl, that he would goe up in her countrey and lett the Engtons [=English] retume to Cabo Corso Ca tie, and J beleeve (I] had ent her some bruterer [sic:= more brutal?] an wer had not the Town Cabbosheers, both Whinnebah and Anguinas, come and desiered me to lett all things alone tell the next day, for that she was in drink. Its seemes he had bound herselfe by an o[a)th not to drink palme wine for uch time, which this day was expired. The next day [I] a ked her [omission] weather she remember s what she had done to me, or that the Cabbosheers had made herselfe sensable of what affronts she had put apon me I know not, butt she sent her boy, who I sent back with this answer, that I was none of her boy[s] , wherefore he ent the foresaid Cabbosheers to take me by forst [=force] , with whome I whent, where after she had begged parding [=pardon] and owned her faulte he gave me t[w]o potts of wine as an acknowledgement, which I proffered to the Cabbo beer . I thought fitt to give you an accompt , not that I fear any quarrell will insue, butt that you might ee what a perplexety I live in, and that if any quarrell happens you may not attribute to any rashenes of mine but some great provocation , as alsoe to incite [you] to afford me what assistance can of woorkemens, that now I have shells and stones may putt myselfe in a posture of defense. My couzen is able to informe you how fare I have gon with the Forte,95 and how soon that if I had butt woorkmen to make itt fitt for men to lodging [ = lodge in] and defensable. I have had two or three such drunken palavers as which they have ended withowt any harme, shall desi[s]te troubleing you with them, butt I am shure its neather safe nor eais [= easy) Iieving amongst people of this nature, who is [in] theire drinke more like Bachaneils [ = Bacchanal s) then people of sense and reason. The way between this place and Accra & Quamboe is stopped by Accroomes and Fanteeners apon a murder committed upon a[n] Accroomes. His head and right hand they presented to Addoo,96 wluch makes beleeve the Acquamboes had a hand. They are a makeing of it up as fast as they can, the Aquambo have sent for the person to Accra that clid itt. In the mean time it hinders a littell of our trade, said souldiers lyeing up and downe makes traders somewhat cautiousm , the Accroomes haveing sent very sharp message to them that if they doe not speedily make satisfaction they would assist [ms. 'assites'] the Accroomes [sic) against them [ms. apparently 'mt'). By the next shall give you a[n) accompt whow [= how] it goes, hopeing by that time that it will be accomodated. I will not suffer them [to] plunder here in the Whinnebah country, because the King of Aquamboe shall have noe pretence of a quarreU against tlus place, butt att the Salte ponds which is about a mile from us theire have bin Aquamboe people plundered, and I beleeve if satisfacton be not speedyly made will be eaither killed or sould. The 100 blew perpetuanoes and 300 sheets you sent by Capt. Piles have received, as alsoe the iron woorke and I 000 of nailes, butt the lead barrs 50 can hear noe newes of them, Capt. Piles telling me he noes nothing of them, therefore pray enquier of the Bomboy which way they whent, supposting they may be left bebinde. Pray supply me with caske or two of knives, 10 or 20 cheast of sheets and a baile or two of green perpetuanoes. I have a prospect this month will exceed the last in trade. [PS) I have sent two men slaves by Capt. Piles for that you returned the other. Be pleased to give me credit for, as alsoe for a woman this cannoe carries who was runn away. PS. I have sent up to be mended the following things, 2 iron crows, carpenters adzes and saw & wood axes, 2 maules, they being to light may make two into one, a wedge. 1099. Nicholas Buckeridge Winnebah, 19 Nov. 1694 Yours of the 16 by the 11 hand cannoe, accompai ned with two hundred and fortiefive dozen of knives att 10 per angle, seventy five green perpetuanocss att 9aeach, three hundred and ninety sheets at 10a each, and 10 lead barrs [rece ived]. As soon as an oppen unity presents shall write to Mr Bloome about them, notthinking conveni ent to putt the Company to charge of cannoe hire, butt I desiercdthe maules to be made heavier, which you have not observe d, the lightness ofthem occations much more labour to the poor slaves, wherefore I have returnedtwo, eaither both to be made into one or to put more iron to the other, for as theyare they will doc us noe good, and stones are soe very hard to cult. The carpenters saw came not, wherefore I desier you would supply me with one by firstopportunity, William beging to come on board {ms. 'broad']. Not long sencesupplyed Mr Bloome per order with some iron tooles or woorke, the particularsshall give you at the bottom, which att your leashure pray returne me. The 2 brickaxes & the rest arc taken in my inventory, the 2 brick axes shal I have occation forimle]deately to cover my roome, which in a day or two will be ready. lf AntonyBrown be in a condition to woork pray hasten him downe, for have a great desierto gitt the Companeys consernes into the [omission],97 to effect [ which] shallwant six paire of hinges for doors and as maney for windows, with lock for someof the doors and bolts for the others, and if you cannot supply me with locks Jettme have some staples and hasps for said locks. I am sorry your stock of woorkemcn is soc small , and your occation as great, wherefore shall desist fms.'desits'] pressing any further, oncly if you can with conveniensy spare me the oldman the carpenter to instruct Will about the starecase and some other small thingswee are a goeing about, in tenn days or a fortenight shall returne them againe. [PS] I have sent by this cannoe two men slaves I received from our Queenjust now. 6 trowells, 2 brick axes, 2 pairs line pines, 3 brick hammers. 1100. Nicholas Buck eridge Winnebah , 27 Nov. 1694 Meeting with this opportunity of a cannoe bound up thought fin to advise youthat 1had disposed of twelve pieces of the pintadoes you sent and expecte a mandaily to take a bendyes worth, wherefore if Capt. Piles comes this way desieryou would supply me with some more, as alsoc some rumm. 1101. Nicholas Buckcridge Winnebah, 10 Dec. 1694 By this convenance you will receive my accompts and ballance, being mkl l: 0:0: 4t. The great ring I was forced to take of the Queen, but as she took some tallow I hope you will not retume it on [ms. 'one'] my hands. To make her change it will occations words. The 40 lead barrs which by mistake where sent to Accra, although have not as yet received them, [h]as charged my selfe, not doubting of their return ife delevered to Mr Bloome. I have nothing of novelty to info1me you, and as to the building my Serjant is able to give you an accompt, as alsoe some small necessaries that I want for the plosturing [ =plastering] of those roomes that got ready, which pray supply me with, that I may git my goods in to the Forte before Christmastime. Sence the makeing up of my accompts have sould above thirty pieces of perpetuanoes and allmost all my 2 lb basons, wherefore pray let me have by this cannoe one baile of blew perpetuanoes and by the first oppertunity some pewter and sheets. 1102. William Cooper Winneybah , 25 Feb. 1694/5 Yours of the 13 February I received, and according to your orders therein have inventoryed the Factory of Agga, & delivered the same with the keyes into the possession by Mr Buckeridge, and at our arrivall have taken inventory of this Factory, which have taken into my possession. By Mr Buckeridg e have sent my Agga accompts & ballance, which amounts to, all charges deducted, mklO 6oz Sa lt a.98 Understanding Mr Bloome is going for England doe humbly request you will favour me with Accra, but if Mr Searle should desire it & you should designe it him, that you will grant me Commenda, in either of which that you shall please to place me, shall do my utmost for the Royall Company interest & your satisfaction. 99 1103. William Cooper Winneyba h, 4 March 1694/5 This only advises that since my [ms. 'may' ] last the Cabbosheers have been with me and demanded a perpetuano and 8 gallons rumm for custome at [ms. 'as'] a new Chief coming, whithout which they will not give the least assistance more towards fetching of stones & shells &ca . I have put them of with faire words till I know your orders therein. The Queene of Anguina I expect downe in 3 or 4 days, & as I understand will demand custome & ground rent, I desire to know your pleasure what I shall do about it per first opportunity. We are in want of nailes of al] sorts, and bricks what you can spare. 1104. William Cooper Winnebah, 18 March 1694/5 I have rece ived yours of the 14th instant. As to the Cabbosheers demands theyrequire no more for the custome of a new chief, but they and the Queen (who issince come down) ask dashes for their generall danceing s (being now at thistyro), 100 vizt two pintadoes , six sheets, & eight gaUons rumrn, which they saywas used to be given when this place was formerly setted. The Queen likewisedemands for her selfc a say and longee for a new Cbeifs custome, and for theground rent she asked Quo whither or noe it was time to demand it, who told hershe could not expect any till the gunns were aU mounted , and he assures me shewill not tiU then desire it. As soon as I received yours, I sent away Quo up to Captai n Acong, theLeiutenant &ca, 101 & the rest of the Cabbos heers of that country [i.e. Accron ],who promise they will not supply the Mina people with one chest of come, buton the contrary will panjar all that comes to Apom or thereabouts, 102 they beingencouraged thereto by the Captain Domine of Quamou , 103 who hat[h] sentCaptain Acong a verry rich cloth for that end, and Bonnishc of Annimaboe hathsent & given him a boy slave to reincourage him thereto, & to see it done is goohimselfe, who Quo left on his way thithcr. 104 He and the rest desires you willsend them a small dashee. 1 have already given them five sheets, but for theircome they say they will not bring it hither, but iff 1 will have it I must fetch itfrom thence. I have agreed with the Cabbosheers of Anguina to bring what comethey can at la 6ta per chest, who promises great quantityes, but as yet havebrought none downe. The mistake about the Guiney stuffs is in the lette r that came downe withthem to Agga, which makes mention but of three hundred .105 That of the manslave I found a while after 1had sent up my accomp ts, which being past correcting1shall creditt in my next accompts. The 6 boysadoes were each 1/ 7 damaged. PS. I desire you will send me accompts of the soldiers pay. We want . dozenbolts & staples, . dozen hasps & staples, a quire or two cartridge paper &cartridge thored [=thread], 7 linstocks, boards for to make a gate, an iron ban 4foot 4 inches long, with staples for the same, an halbart for the Serjant. Per bearer have sent a man slave on accompt of the Royall African Compagnie of England. I just now received advise that Captain Acong hath panyard some Mina people. Just now Quansa of Tantumquerry has sent his boy to ask for powder and short for his people to assist the Fanteners. 106 l crave your answer. Winneybah, 31 March 16951105. WilJiam Cooper Yours of the 22d instant I have received, and have given the Queen & Cabbosheers their demands, but as yet have not seen the Accrom Cabboshee rs, but intend in a day or two to meet them att Apom, & see if I can perswade them to bring their come to this place (for I find their will be no security at Apom), and to that end have sent my boy to invite them thither. They send word they can lett me have a good qantity, as the Anguina Cabbosheers before have done, but as yet find them verry slack, the which I presume may be by reason of their rowasaw ing. I have bought two five hand canoes, & have bespocke one 15 hand, 9 hand & 7 hand canoes, which am promised sbaJI have in little tyme. I desire to know how I shall send them upp, being most of the canoe men (the rains coming on) have left this place. Pray lett the iron work & nails be sent per first opportunity. PS. Just now Quansa of Tantumq uerry arrived here, and in his way panjard a Dutch canoe with one mo lletto man, who he has brought hither with him on suspition of going to bribe the Aquamboe rs to fall on the back of the Fanteners & Acromes. 107 He has Reft him with me, whom I shall detaine till I know your orders how I shall disposoe [sic] of him. Wineybah, 6 April 16951106. William Cooper This serves to accompany accompt from February I 5th to March ultimo 1695, with 2 men slaves bought on the Royall Companys accompt. Since I have been here have had noe trade so much to defray the whole Factory charge. Tomorrow I expect the Accrom Cabboshee rs, who have promissed to come hither to treat about thejr come, and as l understand are inclined 10 bring it here. I yet have noe corne from Anguinna, can receive only their promises. Within day or two I expect them [= the Accron Cabbosheers] downe with their bendifoes in order to march & joyne with Taggees camp. 108 They have sent already to me to give them some powder & short, as Quanza also has done. I desire to know your pleasure if it shall be allowed them. PS. Since my last, Quanza intending to send up the three canoe men which he paniard with the moletto into to [sic] the country to seJJ, att the canoe mens desire I bought them f him for four ounce fo[u]r angles & a halfe , who promi se in 10 days I hall be repaid. To that end have lett one of them passe . There is a canoe gone for that purpose. The rest remaine here for my ecurity for his remme , & on payment to Jett them all pas free. Quanza demands custome for a new Chief. We are in great want of halfe a core crews for the laves to carry shells in, some hoocks &ca for the windowes, & the iron I fonnerJy wrote for, iron barTs or gralings for the prison , & a barr for a door for the same, 3. foot long, & expecially nails. Our hour glass is brocke, & desire may have a two hour glass, & one half hour glass. Just after the ensealing of this Ataboy arrived, who says unless I will give 2a per chest will lett none be brought downe , oe that I perceive there will be noe lickelyhood of getting any come here. Acroom Cabbosheers are not yet come. 1107. William Cooper Winneybah, 13 April 1695 This is to accompany Roger Pinson , who being verry sick, & noe doctor here to assist him, desired to came up to Cabo Corso & heath [=hath] hired him self a canoe. I desire you will lett me have another in his stead, & if you cou'd spare 2 or 3 more men, the other two being ill lickwise. Yours of the 10th instant I received. The Queen & Cabbosheers &ca being out of lowne, have not yett spoke to them of come what you write of, but shall as soone a they retume. As yett have not come enough to load th canoe, but shall in a day or two. PS. I have 3 men slave on accompt of the Royall Company , which haveing conveniency of a p1i on hall keep them here, & what else I buy, except you order me to the contrary & fitt opportunity present of sending them upp. The slaves are in great want of crews to carry shells with. I have paid of Roger Pinson last months pay 12a 11 ta, which shall pass in my next accompt. 1108. William Cooper Winneybah , 15 April 1695 This only comes to accompany one five hand canoe, aboard of which I have sent butt six chests of come, on the Royall Companys accompt. As yett I have not come to load the other canoe, nor men to carry it up. The Queen and Cabbosheers are not yet returned , soe as yett cannot advi e farther. 1109. William Cooper Winneybah , 23 April 1695 This comes with James Badham souldier, being verry ill of a viollent feavour & flux, haveing here noe assistance of a Doctor or medicines , desired to be sent up . Pray lett me have one in the roome of him, and him I last sent, and if you can to Jett me have one or two men more. I have bought 2 slaves & one women more, & if I had long irons in keeping them here they might be a help to carry stones &ca. Winneybah, 25 April 16951110. William Cooper Yours of the 23th instant have received, but I have not yet three chests come to send the canoes with. Ataboy has been here, with whom (not whithout considerab le expence) I made an agreement att 2a per chest to send downe what come possibly he or others could with expedition, and went away in haste, as he pretended to dispatch it downe, but on lbe contrary as soone as he arrived there stoped the ways & will suffer noe corne to be brought here. The Queen is not yett come from Queens croome, soe tomorrow shall send Quo to Anguinna to know the meaning of it, and to make the palaver. The King of Accrome has also been here, who prornissed to send his come to this place, but has since sent word that he will not doe it, and I find noe possibility of secureing it at Apom, tho' there were a house there. There are so many canoes from Cabo Corso &ca for corne that this day were few Blacks haveing a little come which I could have had. They will not sell it me unless I will give them three angles per chest, so that I know not what to doe to answer your expectations. PS. There is noe yams to be had. Per next opportunity pray Jett me have LOchests of sheets. Winneybah, 3 May 16951111. William Cooper Yours of the 25th past I received, & the three slaves returned me by Mr Rootsey, 109 but not like as they were when I bought them (when as Mr Rootsey was pleased him self to tell me were good). I beleive the scarcity & want of come brought them soe low, but now they begin to grow & look verry well. However I shall sent three more in roome of them, haveing already 2 more by me. Here is palaver upon palaver about come. I cannot get it, I beleive, if you would give 2.[a] per chest. The Cabbosheers of Anguinna have had a dif.ferance & kiU'd sevcrall men, soe seeing noe lickelyhood of come here, I went my self to Acrom and agreed with Acong &ca I.heCabboshecrs at 2a 3ta per chest (who expects you will give him a perpetuano), to supply me with what corne they can at Apom, from whence I must fetch it in canoes, there being noe lickelyhood of securing it, there is such a pack of rogues harbouring the place. Tomorrow shall send the other canoe & dispatch her from thence if possible, there being so many canoes there for come makes me afraid they will not performe their promisse. I have this day turned awayseven or eight canoes which came hither for corne & offerd 3a per chest. Since my last the Queen arrived (who has sent to make up the palaver), whom I acquainted with what you ordered me about money being carried of to interlopers. She say[ ] she will stand by me (and lickwise the Cabbosheers) if you will begin to aUow her monthly ground rent from this tyme , like as is paid at Accra, and the Cabbosheers some allowance besides, o as noe canoes shall be suffer' d to goe aboard of ships with money, which I think much better then to be as now it is. PS. In 3 or 4 days intend to send my accompts . 1112. William Cooper Winneybah, 7 May 1695 This only come with the new five hand canoe, empty (bought for the Royall Companys accompt), for I cannot get corn to load, the Acroomes falling from their words. Pray lett me have what sheets I wrote for the first opportunity, and some large nails for the gate. PS. T'other day a French ship took off of Tantumquerry the Dutch Briganteene & passed per this road to leaward. Prince desires to know what you will please to have for a woman slave with you (which says is his sister), and be will pay you & send a canoe for her. He tells me hee has already spoke about her, her name is Aducaraba. The carpenter has broke his chisell , desire you will send another per first opportunity. 1113. William Cooper Winnebah, 16 May 1695 This is to conduct my Aprill accompt, which should have been with you before but that have been indi 'PO ed with the flux & a violent pain in my head . I have little to add but that the Queen is urgent to know what you 'l allow &ca for ground rent , which she says when it is agreed on no canoes shall be suffered to go off to interlopers. Here is a Cabbosheer not far from hence has stopped a man slave, which on examination is found to run away from Cabo Corso Castle. He demands a say & a blue perpetuano. I have offer'd him the usual! allowance, but for Jes[ ] than his demands says he will not deliver him , so request to know your plaesure whether or no shall act further in it. I suppose he is one of the slaves which Capt. Piple [=Piles] brought upp. He says hunger made him nm away. I have been often asked for heets, & desire you to send send at leest ten or dozen chasts [ = che ts] per first opportunity. PS. The Braffo of Fanteene i come into the Acrom country, & offer them money to assist him to fight the Fantenes, 110 & has likewise sent to the Winnbeybah & Anguinnas people to help him, & last night passed per a messenger here to Bonnishee to gett the aid of the Aquamboes. 111 As yet l do not find the Winneybahs at all inclined, how the rest stand affected I cannot tell, but as soon as I understand shall advise, if so be you will thinck conve nient I should send a canoe purpose ly. Large nails we want to make the gates to secure the slaves. Last night the 2 women slaves I wrote off, leaving them out to grind cankey, broak through the gate & run away Winnebah, 24 May 1695 1114. Willia m Cooper Yours of the 21 instant I received, with three hundred & ninty sheets on accompt of the Royall African Company. The Queen being gone up to Anguinas to interr the corps of Ahenrunia Bondy, her brother, whoe is latly deceased, cannot give answer concerrung what contract she may be willing to assent to [ms. 'so'] till her returne, which I expec t will be in a few days, but this much I may presume to say. Tho this place may exceed Accra in expinces, yet is far short of what are yearly & such times as danceing &ca given away att Annimaboe, & I believe, by what I have seen, were the fort once firushed & in good condition would make as good returns to the Company as that or perhaps some other. Winnebah people promise not to middle[ = medd le] whith the Braffos pallave r, & l have sent to Anguin na to perswa de them to the same, & shall also send [to] Acrom, Quansa &ca, & as I hear shall advise you. The Cabbos heer that has taken up the Royall Compa ny slave lives this side the Dev ills Hill. 112 Have sent Quo several! times to demand him, & att last has plainly told him that he sold the slave to a Quamboe man, whoe hath carried him away. The walls of the fort are all finished , so [am] raiseing the battlements & tower, & have sent the sawyers to [ms. 'so' ] see if there were trees fitt for board, whoe says they will doe well but lye very far distant. The Ang uinnas deman.d severall peas gold before they goe to work for use of the place, & when the trees are felled all the Companys slaves here will not be enough to gett them to the sau [ = saw) pitt, & the Anguinnaas not will[= will not] help except some thing be allowed them . What stones we are able to breake in a month will not I am sure firush what remains to be done. The sawyers want a driss [sic: = ?) for the whipsau, & if possible to lett him have another whipsau, this being as they say not near long or big enough, & two files. Please to send the chizells & nails per first oppertunity. PS. Pray let me have a little paper. I am forced to tare [ = tear] one of my books to write this on, or otherwise shall not have wherewithall to wright my accompts. I cannott gett come except you will give 3as per cheist. The Apom people have provided 50 che ts for the interloper, whoe has sent down to them & promised 3a per chest, & the blacks themselves give that rate that comes from Cabo Corsoe . I have ent up Roger Pimsons chest. He ows nothing here. 1115. William Cooper Winnebah, 7 June 1695 This is cheifly to advise that I have sent to the Accromes, Anguinna's & Quansa's in your names to desire them not to meddle with the Braffo's palaver. Acong & the Acrome Cabbosheers promisse they will not assist him. As yet have had no answer from Quansa, nor Anguinna, but Winnebah's assure me the Anguinna's will not medle in it. Yesterday the Braffo him selfe sent to me his son & some other messengers that I would be his friend, & that I would lett nobody abuse his people if he sent any of them thi way, & al so to meet him half way between the croom he is now come to & this pleace, but I have told them I was sent here only to mind the Royall Company bu siness, & not to involve my selve in black palavers, & for meeting of him that I could not leave the factory . Quansa by all appearance is concern' d with him. I have at last agreed with the Anguinna's people for six pease to let the Royall Companys slaves work in their woods, & have set the sawyers & carpenters to work, who have cutt downe severall trees, & the laves are now building a house to lodg[e] in. In squa1ing of the timber the carpenter ha broak his axe, which with four crows, one maule & two wedges , being in the like condition, have ent up per this canoe to be mended, which I desire you will retume per thi canoe, with the chizell I formerly sent & nails wrote for, & to send another broad axe, these I have being to smaU, and another whipsaw and driss, & two or three bills to lop the boughs of the trees, without all which they can make no dispatch. PS. Just now the Braffo's on told me if I would not meet him, when the Queen is retum'd he & Qnansa will come hither, which shows plainly Quansa is concern'd with him. Pray Jett me have some paper, else I cannot send more letters or accompts. Pray if you can let me have two good Jock , one for the prison, one for the gate, & I desire you will uply me with two or three barells powder for the fort use. 1116. William Cooper Winnebah, 21 June 1695 All yours dated May the 17th , June Js1 It" & 17th , have received, & hall follow your orders to get what come I can, but your letter came to late to disapoint the English interloper, he being at Apom a weak before your came to hand, but I have hinder'd hi getting any from this place, & truly I believe there is verry little in this country, els they would bring greater quantitys hither at the price, for as yet I have not above 3 or 4 che ts. Upon the receipt of yours by Atta, 113 I sent my boy to Quanza to demand the canoemen, who [= Quanza] went with my boy to the man that panyard them, he liveing near the river of Amessa, in the_ country of Fanteen far from hence, & made him deliver them. Quanz.a told my boy it was done without his knowledge, and 1 know not unless l could have devined, how l could advise of the palaver when [neither) I nor the Cabbosheers , nor any els of this place heard of word of it till Atta arrived, & the panyaring the canoe men so farr of hence was not through any default in me, for want of good correspondence with my neighbour[s] the natives, which I beleive I do as fairly keep with them, & do endeavor it as much as any that have lived in this place before me. Atta has been with the Queen of Anguinna, who is not yet return'd, and yesterday I sent Atta & my boy to Quanzas to perswade him not to assist the Braffo , which he has promised them he will not. He had sent for the Anguinna bendifoes, who are now here, to have them assist him, but I have perswaded [them], as likwise the Winnebahs, & also Acong (who will not suffer them to pass through his country) to returne. The iron work you sent with the whipsaw & nails have received, butt the nails are much lo bigg for our use. Have sent a naile by Atta to show what size we want both for the gate & to fioer [= floor] the rooms with. The sawyers arc at work in cutting boards, & hope shall quickly dispatch them, therfore desire may have a good supply of nails by first conveyance. J have finished another flanker (havcing no bricks) with stones, & want tarras to finish the other two. I shall endeavor when the Queen arrive, to gett the ground rentt &ca as cheap as I can, but 1 beleive she wi II not abate of what I writt, she & the Cabbosheer[s] haveing learn'd too much what is yearly & monthly allowd in Fanteen. PS. Pray lett me have the chizell, & two files to sharpen the whips sawes. Acong has sent to me to desire you will send him a dashee for refuseing to assist the Braffo, who otfer'd him six bendys. I told him I t(h]ought you did him a kindness in advyseing him to the contrary, without any dashee, but he still makes his sutte [= suit). I sent to Apom & Acong &ca but to no purpose, for I understand the interloper will have come tho' he gives 4a per chest. I have sent 3 women slaves per returne of the great canoe comeing from Accra in lieu of the 3 slaves retum'd me. Pray let me have 2 or 3 barrells powder for the fort use, what I have being most expended. I have would have sent come now what I have, but neither canoe can take it in. 1117. William Cooper Winnebah , 25 June 1695 This only advises that I have received the three hundred twenty five she[e)ts on the Royall African Companys accompt, for which shall doe my endeavour in the disposeing of them. I desire you will not fay! to supply me with the necessarys under writt per this conveyance. PS. Just now a messenger arrived from Quanza to me to advise that he has turn' d the Braffo from his party, & that the Braffo designs for Accrom. 1118. William Cooper Winnebah, 29 June 1695 This only accompanys two chest of come which I send by this on accompt of the Royall African Company of Englan d. At present have not more to advise of, the Queen being not yet arrived, who as I understand is gone to meet the King of Akims, is the cause of her stay. PS. This morning I heard from severall blak that the Dutch Galley mett off of the Little Devills HillJJ 4 two days ago a French shjp, with whom she made a running fight till she came within 2 leagues of Accra. 1119. William Cooper Winneyba h, .13July 1695 Trus serves to conduct my May & Jun accompt, where in I have bought on the Royall Companys accompt four men slave , whic h with the rest formerly bought remaine here. As yett have had but litt le trade, being the black cheifely ask for perpetuanoes & powder. If there be any herba longee go ld I de ire may have one case of them, two or three caske of two pound pewter basons, & 5 lb if there be any, oroe brass basons, a case of good pintadoes, powder e pecially for the fo1ts use, & if can spare any to sell, & tarra , tarr &ca, nails. I should have sent my accompt sooner, but have delay 'd them that I might advi e of the contract with the Queen, with whom I have agreed to pay her five peze per month, & custome at a new Cheif comein g and a[t] danceing as already I have paid, and at cutting her corn a phota longee or any thing else to that value & a case of liquor, and at Christmas time a say & longee & a case of spirits, & with John Le Grand (the Captain of the towne) I have agreed to pay him four angles per month, & a red cloth at Christmas & other dashes as already paid the Cabbos heers, but Prince , Ataquo & Abarraco I can not come to an aggrement with, o Ataquoe comes up with the e to know what you will please to allow them. The two latter ask 4a per month each, & I offer'd them 2a each, which J thought wa veny sufficient, but Prince would not tell me how [much] be would have, but a far a I can gather he expect half as much as the Queen. I desire to know your pleasure per returne of this canoe , & instructions what they must sign to. The Queen & John Le Grand say they will take a fetish in the open market place that none shall be suffered to goe of to interlopers, & if any hould gett off will seize on their goods at their returne, and the other three promise the same when you agree with them. 1120. William Cooper Winneybah, 20 July 1695 Both yours of the 13th & 18th instant have received, with 200 two pound pewter basons, 150caddy chints, one barrell powder, I 00 silck longees, & one cask tarr, but no brushes, which clesire may be sent per next I have detaind the brick.layer[sJ (for which I begg your pardon), being already suply'd with a good quantity of stones & lime, & their going would be a great hindrance to the building. B[e]sides the Queen so ill resented it when she heard of it, that she said if you took away the workmen, she would retume inLo Anguinna, & the Cabbosheers that they would leave of their assmstance,so hope you will not take it as any contempt from me in not obeying your orders. I have alsoo received the articles of agreement of Diclcies Cove and Comrnenda, & when I have finished the same with the Queen & Cabbosheers (which shall endeavo ur to do as much as in me lies to the Royall Company intrest) shall returne them to you. Since my last with my accompt to you, have disposed of alJ the carpets I had (saveing 3 or 4 damaged ones), therfore request you will send as soon as possible 300 carpets, here being traders that stay purposely for them, & one cask knives, bras pans &ca. Powder & blue perpetuanocs are verry much wanted, which later at present must be contented withowt. I have per retume of the canoe sent 325 sheets (being as much as the canoemen say they can carry), tho' believe shall soon be in want of them, being in expectation of a vcn-y good trade. The axle trees shall be sent up as soon as can be gott ready. If you please to send a cask shall send up lime, haveing a considerab le quanti ty already burnt. 1121. William Cooper Winnebah, 26 July 1695 Yours by the 11hand canoe of the 13th instant have received, with three hundred woollen carpetts & seven hundred eighty six pound brass & a quarter cask tarras, but no more then one tarr brusch on accompt of the Royall African Company of England, & have per the retume of the canoe sent as much lime as he can carry. The bricklayers I have send downe to Mr Searle. 115 If there be any nails already made desire you will send them per first opportunity, & likewise to send twenty pair of hinges for windowes & six pair of hinges for doers, with hoocks suitable, and ten pair of bolts for windows. We have rumor here that the King of Aquamboe designes to take the fort, & destroy all the blaks of the towne. 116 I am at present but in an ill posture to make any defence, therfore desire you will send some hand granadoes, some muskett schott & some muskeus, that I may be in a condition not to be affrighted with such reports, & if you could to spare a Gunner I have now gott all the gunns I have up, but want carriges, & the carpenter being employed to quare the timbers for the awyers cannot without you'l please to lett me have another as yet make any. Adossa have sent up per this canoe, shall be in want of another in hi place. PS. When I telld Prince that you would not allow him more then 4a per month he aid if you gave him not what he demanded , [he] would stop aU merchants from comeing hither , & would carry them to & fro to Barracu towne, o to prevent disturbance after many word have promi ed he should have a cloath of scarlett broad cloth or to the value at Christma time yearely , an iron barr att row awing time. When they have signed the articles shall send them up. Ados ' a is indepted to me 3a, which begg the favor, being he is wilJing, [to be] paid me at pay day. 1122. Willfam Cooper Winnebah , 24 Aug. 1695 Yours of the 16th instant per the 7 hand canoe I received. Being out of lyme have stayed the canoe till I could gett some burnt , per returne of which have sent as much as she can carry without casks (of which I have none). I cannot supply you with any more lime, the alt pond stopped so can come at no shells, and all the perswa ions I can make cannot gett the Winnebah people 's consent to breake it open, and all because they want to make salt. 117 I shall be verry much at a loss if I can find no other way to gett some. Per this canoe have also ent two qua1ter cask rum , on the Royall Company accompt, and inclosed have sent the artjcles of agreement made with the Queen of Anguinna and Cabbosheers of Winnebah (& returned the coppy of Commenda & Dickie Cove articles). At their takeing fetechee they would have a perpetuano & half anchor of rum. Since my last have had but little trade, by reason of differance happenning betweene the Queen & Prince , which has runn so heigh that all the Anguinna's sieding with Prin e have threeatned to kill the Queen, & have topped the ways. It has created me a great dealJ of trouble in endeavouring to make it up, and yesterday I sent Abaracu, Quo & my boy to pracifye [ = pacify] the Anguinnas Cabbo sheers & to bring downe Ataboy to end the palaver , which hope at last will end well . I am in great want of naile , hinges & locks [ms. 'kocks' ], as have formerly writt. Another carpenter would verry much help forward our timber work. 1123. William Cooper Winnebah , 30 Aug. 1695 This accompanys Ataquo, who is sent by A.taboy & Anguinna' s Cabbosheers to request you if possible to spare them two or three barrells powder , they haveing appointed to meet the Ackims in a few day .118 The palaver of the Queen is not yet made up, and until! it is can expect no trade. I am daily endeavouring to bring them to a fair complyance. It is occasioned chjefly through the Queens folly, as Ataquo can advise you. Pray order if the nails & hinges be done to be sent by Attaquo's returne, being verry much in want of them, and if you please to send a kask [= cask] of knives, what I had being the greatest part disposed, the remainder being something rousty [=rusty] will not readily go of. 1124. William Cooper Winncbah, I7 Sept. 1695 Yours the 71roinstant I received, with the nails & hinges therein mentioned. This comes cheifly to accompany my July & August accompts & ballance, which (all factory charges deducted) amounts to five marques two ounces gold, which by bearer you will recieve on the Royall African Company accompt. I am daily getting the Fort in a posture of defence, and if Thad but carriges for the guns [ms. 'gains'] & any supply of men & amunition might not be afraid of any black enemies, wrnch I request you will hasten, with a barrell or two of powder, granadoes, cartridge paper (if so be any can be possibly spared), and the iron work remaining, for the Aclams a few days since haveing faJJen upon severall Aquamboers a goeing to trade to their part, have killed & cutt of the heads of about fo1ty peop le, and taken several!, 119 and whe have now strong reports that in revenge of it, the Aquamboers are resoluted to fall in this place, & I beleve the Winnebahs on the least approach will all runn away. 120Prince is come from Anguinna, and desire[sl me to write for what men you can spare, & is verry urgent with me to send to you for more powder, but I have acquainted rum with what you wrote me last. The pallaver with the Queen is almost done. The woman slave that is wanting must be Captain Peters fault in not delivering her, for I delivered him three women slaves and 1 had no more then three returned me, which the bearer & sundry others can testifye. PS. I desire you will by first opportunity supply me with a new flagg, this I have being quite blowne in peices and unfitt any more to be hoisted. 1125. William Cooper Winnebah, ** Sept. 1695 I since the sending up my accompt and ballance, ove[r]looking my accompt, find that the three hundred fifty sheets I returned by your order July 20th past, (through haste) not then examining the same, passed them disposed for gold, so that thereby [ have overpaid two marks four ounces five angles gold, which request, my accompt being passed, you will please to give me crcditt for in my next accompt in part of ballance, and my selfe shaD doe the same, on accompt of the Royall African Company of England. PS. Since my la t what sheets remained are all disposed, and most of the green perpetuanoe . Desire you to end three or four bale of green perpetuanoes, & a baile of red, if any left, per first opportunity. 1126. William Cooper Winnebah, 25 Sept. 1695 Yours of the 21 ¥L instant have received with three whitemen, but as yet no more then nine blak soldiers are arrived. I hall take care to top the debts you order before any others. The two barrells gunpowder & iron work have received. The noise of the Aquamboes comeing still continues, & severall people for fear have left the towne . I have now about twenty plank already cutt. I judge what more they are now sawing will be sufficient, so that Bastian will be a greatt help when he comes. The green perpetuanoe are all disposed save one, o desire what I wrote for in my .last may be sent, & ome ca[r]tridge paper, haveing not enough for one ca1tridge. 1127. William Cooper Winnibah, 5 Oct. 1695 Yours of the 3d in tant per Bastian & the three quarter casks mm on the Royall Companys accompt, and the two quarter cask in the roome of tho e I sent up, I received by the 5 hand canoe, and hall forward the carpenter in hi worck with all expedition. The reason my sending up a messenger to the King of Akim country was for no other designe then meerly that he would encourage traders [t]his way, the trade of this place (as you are sensibly) depending wholly upon that country, and not for the hurting of the King of Aqua1nboe or any else. 121 In my last forgott to mention of the death of one of the men slaves, which dyed the 24 of September past. lnclosed have ent four certificates , two whereof for the slave, the other for the fom carpets found wanting in a baile , no.239. I also forgott to mention that in the last che t of sheets I opened I found wanting nine, there being really no more then fifty six sheets. l should be hartly glad if any of the Company ships where arrived, want of good being a great hindrance to this trade. PS. I have lost allmost three marks worth of goods out of the warehouse, stollen away [ms. 'alway'] and carryed all to Prince, who was the author of it. As yet I have made no stirr about it, being desirous to know your mind therein, for if I use any forcible means will I am afraid hinder the saweyers work and put a stop to traders. The man that took the goods to deliver Prince , being his Chief man , was ketched in the action by one of the slaves, who since that has nol been seen here. Bastian wants by first oppo11unity 12 iron bolts eighteen inches long, 12 ditto twelve inches long, 12 diuo nine inches long, 8 ditto fourcteen inches long. We want also staples for the windows to fasten the bolts, with 24 trucks [ms. 'turcks'] for the gunns. 1128. William Cooper Winnibah, 18 Oct. 1695 This conveya nce presenting is on ly to desire you to hasten the iron barrs &a last writt for, being the carriages are almost all done, & likewise some musquets, swords & bandilears for the souldicrs. 1129. William Cooper Winneba , 8 Nov . 1695 This is only to desire, that you will send up per returne of this conveyance three dozen lins pins [=linchpins] for carriage trucks, & three or [ms. 'our' ] four thousand nailes of the sizes incl oscd, being to flour the roomcs. I desire you will not fayle, being Bastian staye s & cannot goe forward without them. Here is Atabo and all the Cabbosbeers of Angu inna, Quansa & his people, & Lagues , the later carry stones, & Accroomes to make up the difiera nce between the Queen & Anguinna's, & also to make the palaver about what l have lost, & likewi se other differances, butt as yett cannot give accompt of the issue of anything. They are all continually with me, so that as yet I can hardly attend any other bussiness, which will delay my accompts. 1130. Willi am Cooper Winnibah , 18 Nov. 1695 This comes purposely to acqua int you that one Mr Huymme, a Dutchman, is come hither for refu ge, haveing fled from Axim, whereof he was chief, on what accompts l certa inly know not. He desire admittance to stay here till he meets with an oppo11unity Lo gctl of the Coast. I have give him entertainment till I know you r orders whether or no may longer protect him, which requ est you will advise me. The Cabbosheers that are mett here sent to the king of Quamboe, where messengers are returned with one from the king, so hope quickly shall make a reight understanding betwixt Quamboe and here. Per bearer have returned the whipsaw, being broak, and desire you will send another in the roome, else cannot goe forward in sawing the boards, axle trees or any thing else. What axle trees we sawed! before have used in the carriage[s], of which we have not yett enough, which when done shall returne Bastia n and endeavor to supply Mr Searle. 1131. William Cooper Winnibah, 19 Nov. 1695 This day since the letter that accompanys this was writt the Cabbo sheers of Anguinn a have opened to me an unexpected palaver after lheir differance was made up with the Queen, which was ended principaly by my mean , that they have a bendy per month paid to the Queen, of which they have made her promise they shall mont[h]ly have one half part, and if you will not allow it they say noe trade or mony shall come here, but if you will allow the same they promise that they will unanimously take a fatish that no mony shall be canyed aboard. The Queen hath openly confessed to them that she hath already made an agreement for five peez per month &a, but she is afraid of contradicting them, for fear of [ms. 'or'] any further palaver that may prove wor e. I think there cannot be worse rogues then the[y] are upon the coast. They have promised I shall have satisfaction for what I have lost, which is butt a poor security, but must at present rest content. I desire to know you[rJ order about it, and if you thinck fitt to grant their demands to retLUáne the articles already made , otherwise to send downe a Cabbosheer that may end that palaver , for the Cabbosheers say I put the rest of the money in my pocket. 1132. William Cooper Winnebah, 30 Nov. 1695 Yours of the 23 instant I received, and according to your order have agreed with the Anguinna Cabbosheers to pay one bendy per month ground rent from the time the Queene first signed the article . I have paid them four bendys eight angles in hand for the time past to the time of their signing and takeing fetiches to the article , vizt 25 instant, which they would not be content wi.thout a[t] first demanding from the time I first came here, which wa long ere I could beat them of from. For the future they will have it [ms. 'to'] paid to the Queene, who is to give them one halfe. They would not take the fetiche without I gave them an ounce and four gallons rumm , being they said their lives depended on it if they broak the fetich, which they publi hed by their Chitchee in the market place that they will puni h all offenders. They likewise would not take the fetishee without I paid them 12 angles more for the sawyer workeing in their woods, six peize they said was not enough for all Anguinna , oe wa forced to comply with [ms. 'whit'] that as well as the rest off their innr a onable demand . The Cabbosheers both of Anguinna and this place all assure me there is a faire correspondance between them and Aquamboe , and the messenger from Aquamboe have told me the same, who are now along with Quansa att Tamtumqueny , soe shall have noe more allarums from thence. The Accroomes are the only people now that are likely to breed disturbance. The fetiches have been newly taken that they should not trouble this place. Two of the slaves I bought being makeing of wish, through the bomboys careles nes , who whent away and left them to them elves, they broak of their iron and run away, whom since have heard are in the Accrom country, who[= the Accroms] will in noe wise Jett me have them, tho' have offerd 10a for each. The Dutchman went from hence on board a interloper before I received yoms , haveing perswaded him thereto, seeing he hath a great deal! of money with him, which he would often shew to the blacks, I told him I did believe you could not protect any under his circumstances, which made him hasten away. This comes with Bastian, whome request you will Jett come againe in a little time, who must forward the saweyer and carpenter work both as he had already done, they being soe faine of haveing none to overlook them, they will take their leisure time if they have none to overlook them, they will not gett boards enough for 7 or 8 months for the fort, which Bastian sayes he would gett enough for 3 or 4 weakes. We are in want of lace pins 122 and nails, & some pitch and oackim. This also inclosed the articles. r have this day newcs that the Akim war with Aquamboe is done, they haveing made up palavera, but cannot affinn it. 1133. William Cooper Winnebah, 9 Dec. 1695 My last to you was per Bastian, which advised of the palavera Tmade with the Anguinna's. This comes only to accompanye my September, October and November accompts. The ballancc, being 3oz Sa 4.ta, have transferred to the next [ms. 'neas' ) accom[pl]s. I have nothing el.se momentary to advise you saves that the news I heard of the Akim warr with Aquamboe being made up is utterly false. 123 I have sent per bearer four iron crowes, four wood axes and two wedges, one trowel! and one hammer, desireing they may be mended and returned per first oppo rtunity. Winnibah, 17 Dec. 16951134. William Coope r Both yours of the 91h & 14 instant have received, & also the mended iron worck & nailes. I shall furnish Mr Searle with a peice for a flagg staff & canky stoncs124 as soon as can gett them ready for him, haveing already sent him planks & axle trees. Per the 15 hand canoe have sent up twenty ax.letrees, being what we have in readiness. I have sent to the Accroomes (as likewise the Cabbosheers the same) about the slaves, but to no purpose, for they will not retume them by any means, unless the country custome be put in practice. 125 With this comes one of the whipsaux, being broak, desircing it may be mended by first oppertunity. Winnebah, 24 Jan. 1695/61135. William Cooper Your I received of the 13 instant , with the bricks & tarras, and desire if you can possible [send) downe one or two canoe more Joad[ed] with bricks to cover with what [ms. 'wath') . peed wee can the upper roomes, else shall lye lyable to a great deale of damage the raines and tennadoes [= tornadoes] may bring. Last [ms. 'lest'] night the goods in the warehouse received a great deale of wett in a travadoe 126 which came uddenly upon us. Per bearer have sent the other whip aw, broak, which request may be mended with all speed & send downe with the other saw per ret11me of the canoe. I request you will likewise sent two or three barrells of powder for the forts use, one sett of bolt pins &a the bolts 17 incles [= inches] & IO incle long each, & ha p and staples, one hundred iron bars, white or blue pautkies &a. 1136. William Cooper Winnibah, 29 Jan. 1695/6 Yours per the 15 band canoe of the 27 instant I have received, with the two hundred iron ban-s, one hundred lead bars, two hundred white pautkies, and one barrell of powder on accompt of the Royall African Company of England. Per returne of the canoe, that she might not goe up empty, have sent up forty chests come on the Royall Company accompt. I desire the bricks and sawes and other ironworck may be forwarded . I am really sorry for the alterations of affaires you write of.127 As yet all here verry quiet, only the Accroomes still detained the fugitive slaves and will in noe wise release them. 1137. William Cooper Winnebah, 6 Feb. 1695/6 Yours of the 41h instant I yesterday received, & immediately on sight sent away the canoemen for Accra, who are just now returned & bring news that three great canoes are now at a grapling at Ba1Tacu, & came with them from Accra. I have given the Cabbasheers & people of the towne powder and shott, & shall presently, so soon as can muster the men together, which are but few here, here being but four canoes, to send them off to panyar them. 128 I have likewise sent powder and shott & liquor to the Cabba beers of [ms. 'to'] Barracu to give their assistance, that if any be ashoar to panyar them, so if the enterprise take effect shall suddenly advise you. I send the canoe away in case we miss of them here, to advise you timely of their comeing. According to your orders, I sent yesterday to Acong, as also to the re t of Acrom Cabbasheers, and sent them liquor. They have sent there solder to Apom & promise their assistance aod to paoyar all the Mine canoes they meet with. They de ired each a cloth, so have sent them each a cloth to encourage them. I have sent powder & liquor to Apom people. 1138. William Cooper Winnebah, 7 Feb. 1695/6 This is to acquaint you that the people I sent of have panyard the 3 Mina canoes I yesterday wrote of. One is a 13 hand canoe, the other two 11 hand & a 7 hand canoes, the men in all thirty two [ms. 'tow'], six whe reof are wounded. They are loaden with empty sheet chests, but cannot as yet tell how many. The canoes as yett lie att a grapling. The men I have in the fort, but am att a great loss to secure them, baveing not one paire of irons to putt them in, soe request you will send twenty or thirty paire as soon as you receive this, else it will be very dangerous either to lett them lye here or send them up, which if you soe doe pray lett the canoe men you send be very well armed. The people that panyard the canoes doe expect some considerable reward, also Acuma, who went in person, one of the Cabbosheers, to gett the Cabbosheers of Barracu assistance their, who sent off their canoes on their approach to assist them, who I presume expect likewise some gratuity. The bussiness is very expensive to me in liquor, which hope may be allowed to be charged, as likewise other expenses. Mr Searles canoe putting in here on her way up, have delivered [to] the canoeme n to take this with them, and also have sent the December and January accompts, duplicates whereof will send by next opportunity. I have not taken enough this two las[t] months to defray fort charges, as per accompt appeares, for wan t of vendable goods, which now, the Fauconberg being arrived, hope may be supplye d with goods following per first opportunity, blue perpetuanoes, sheets, Welch plaines, powder, knives 1 lb basons, herba longees, fine sletias, & ca, a good quantity of each. PS. I desire you would send irons for the forts use. Pray lett me have brick per first opportunity, with six [or] seaven white souldiers and a Gunner. I have the Copeman of Accra's letter to the Mine and one other. Yesterday died one of the men slaves . 1139. William Cooper Winnebah, 11 Feb. 1695/6 Yours of the 8th instant I received, with twenty pairs of irons, with which [ms. 'which with'] I have secured the prisoners panyard, and have secured what was in each canoe. The black[s] that panyard them would never lett me be at rest till I had satisfied them, & hardly could make them stay til I the anivall of your canoe. They would have no less then 2o a man, which with [ms. 'with which'] the Ban-acues made in all 50 men, so I distributed to the value of three bendys amongst them, which I thought I had better doe, that they might be willing to goe on any occasion another time, so that with the other expenses of liquor & powder &c the charge will amount to about a mark of gold. I should be glad to hear of a good issue between both Taggees. 129 PS. Just upon sealing of this came to anchor off the road out of gunnshott aPortuguze & a Flemish shipp, I bcleive belong[jng] to the Dutch, to trappan thecanoes of this place, & others that pase by. I ha vc ordered that none should goeto them, they have both canoes & boats after them. I have ordered the canoe mento sinck the letters if they meet with canoes that offer to panyar them. 1140. William Cooper Winnebah, 15 Feb. 1695/6 This conveyance presenting comes to conduct the duplicates of my last December and January accompts, and to acquaint you of the death of one of thewounded men that were panyard in great canoes. Here is nothing momentorysince my last, save only that wee are in great want of bricks &ca, and if youcould spare a carpenter would much secure the fo1t against the raines, the blackcarpenter I have being not able to forward what is to be done without assistance. 1141. William Cooper Winnebah, 5 March 1695/6 This comes on sight to bring the enclosed from Mr Searle at Accra, 130 adviseingof the bribe of Angwnna s except (=accepted] from the Generali of the Mine togett the Mine canoe men from me, so request you will order them from hence onsight hereof, to prevent any disturbance here with the natives, being att presentsoe ill provided for them. PS. I desire if you think conveinent to order some dashcc to Attabo and theAnguinnas to draw olf their designe. 1142. William Cooper Winnebah , 6 March 1695/6 I wrote you yesterday express, about Atabo (at the Dutch instigation) his designeto force me to deliver up the Mine canoemen, but as yett cannott learne the truthof it no otherwise then as Mr Sear les letter notif{i)es, tho have made exactinquiry into itt. l presume the thing was can-ied on by Prince and Attabo veryprivately, unknown to the rest of the Anguinas.This comes to accompany my January accompt, haveing not hade a trade todefray the Factory charges more than by the accompt appears. This likewise accompany Scrjeant Laird, who being desirous to goe home by the Fauconbe rg, and fearing to loose opportunity, desired leave to come up to be discharg'd, soerequest per returne of the canoe you will supply mcc with another in his rooo me .I desire you will send by first opportu nity, with what else already writt for, 3 or 4bailes of carpetts, those I have remaining being most of them considerablydamaged. The [omission] l have most of the cask are flown in pieces, and thesayes lie and spoyl in the cases, so hope you will please to order what is left ,,,. [what is) to be done with them. What tarris came last most of it is used, desire when you send brick &c to send 3 or 4 hogsheads of tarris. The whipsaws lately mended are almost spoiled, that the sawers can hardly work with them, if you have any new ones come over desire you will send one or two, and likewise two or three stock locks. I have received the six iron hooks, 40 line pins, and one halfe round file. PS. I payd the Serjeant to last pay day, February 28'h 1695/6. Winneba, 14 March 1695/61143. William Cooper All yours dated the 4t\ 7¥h& 9th instant have received, & according to that per Capt. Browne 131 I have received on the Royall Affrican Companys accompt three hundred twenty five sheets, one hundred blew perpetuanoes, ten cases of spirritts, twenty blew Welch plaines, twenty red & twenty yellow ditto, four hundred one pound pewter basons, & 74 gallons of rum. I have not yet put aboard the slaves, Capt. Brown promising to take them aboard att his retume from Accra, but I have put aboard all the Mine canoe men to prevent rusturbance. 132 The canoe men sent downe to carry up the 13 hand canoe panyard [I] do keep here till the retume of the ship, Capt. Browne promising to carry up the canoe & the canoemen with him, the canoe being very heavy to paddle, and putting aboard the Mine men make a great noise, I am fearfull to venture her up, and the canoe men are all afraid, hearing the Dutch Galley waites att sea for her. By the ship will likewise return the 5 hand canoe. Att Ata's arrivall I sent for Attabo to mak the pallaver here, who immediately came downe, to whom Tlaid the palaver Mr Searle acquainted me with, in presence of Capt. Browne, but he utterly denied that ever he had correspondence with the Dutch Copeman of Accra, or that ever he thought of such a thing, but says that he has heard that three or four of the Cabbasheerrs (who he has lately had difference with) hath carried on this intrigue, and to settle a factory in his name, and if they will not desist from it he will fight them. He hath againe taken a fetish 10 be true to the English Company, and also Prince, who says that the same was utterly unknown to him. I have given Atabo the cloth and case of spiritts, with which he was very well pleased, and Prince one case of spiritts, who will come quickly to Cabo Corso. The Queen is not yeti come from Tantum Queery, so have not yett given her the cane &a. Two days since a messenger arrived from the Mine att Mumford, who came with accompanyed with those Cabbasheers to the salt pond, where they sent for the Cabbasheers of this towne to meet them, who before they went acquainted me with ill, and att there return they told me the Mine Cabbasheers had sent to know why they panyard the Mine canoes, and offered them money if they would deliver them up againe , but the Cabbasheers told them the pallaver was not theirs, and that if ever they expected to have them they must make their adress to you, and that if the Mine people panyard any of their canoes on that accompt, they would kill all the Mine people they could meet with. This I thought needfull to acquaint you with, tho the canoemen are safe aboard. I have not any Lime to spare, haveing none but the Mine canoemen to fetch shells these five weeks, and what they have fetched are all used, except enough for one small kiln unburnt , and cannot expect any quantity till the raines have broke open the salt pond. The girder and joice I will gett ready by first opportunity. I keep Atta , in expectation of the four Cabbasheers above mentioned , hoping to make all well up with them. 1144. William Cooper Winneba, 23 March 1695/6 Yours of the 19th instant I have received, and according to your order s therein , shall use my utmost endeavours to keep the Dutch from ever settling in these parts. Since my last, I sent Atta to Anguinna, who brought downe all the Cabbasheers with him, whom I examined about the pall[a]ver the Dutch bath been tampering with. They own' d the Copeman of Accra had sent to them concerning the Mine canoe men and also setling of a factory, but said withal! they returned him answer that the Dutch were strangers to them, and that the English were settled already, and would suffer no other to settle in this countrey. They likewise confessed they was to blame in not acquainting me of it themselves, and promi sed for the future if the Dutch send any more errands to them, they wilJ immediately acquaint me of it. With much adoe I made up the breach between Attabo and them , who are all returned fri.ends. They would not be satisfied till I gave them a blue plaine, and ten gallons of rumm I expended amongst them. I have assured them that if they prove true to the English they should not on any occasion want what assistance you can give them, with which they were satisfied. Wee are in great want of bricks and tarris, which request you will send per first opportunity. PS. This day a Portuguese by name Francis Gonsolous, haveing deserted a Portuguze ship, came hither and desired to be entred for a solder to serve the Royall Company as a souldier for three years , and desires to remaine here in this place, whom I have entertained att 8a 4ta per month, presuming you would not disaprove of itt, here being so few men. I have sent up by this conveyance eight wood axes to be mended , and desire if you have any new and larger you will send some , these being to small. There is now a ship to windward towards Apom which I believe is the Fauconberg. If it be I am disappointed both in sending the slaves, timber and canoe. Winnaba, 24 March 1695/61145. Wi1liam Cooper Since the other of yesterdays date Capt. Browne arrived here, aboard of whom J have put on accompt of the Royall Company four men & two women slaves (one woman remaining, being sick), and also the 13 hand canoe &c. He being in hast to gett up could not stay to take in the timber, which is not yetr brought from the woods. PS. Pray per first opportunity send two or three quires of cartridge paper. [gap in correspondence, April 1696 to March 1697] 1146. Thomas Buckeridge 133 Winneba, 14 April 1697 This by an Accra canoa is to advise that according to your orders, haveing inventoryed Agga Factory and delivered the same to Mr Browne, 134 I proceeded to this place, where last night arrived, Mr Cooper not being returned from Accra. The Doctor hath been very ill , but I hope is upon recovery. My hands being very lame could not make up my accompts, but now shall goe about them as well as I can, haveing left 12 mark at Anamaboe, which suppose will be near the ballance, which therewith intend to send by Mr Cooper. Also Thomas Allners money have left there, 12 ounces. Therefore I returne you many thanks for your late kindness, especially for the employ you have been pleased to give me, which is mightily to my content, and hope in God shall behave myself therein according to your pleasure and interest of the Royall Company. Being much out of order desire you will give me leave. Winneba, 20 April 16971147. Thomas Buckeridge This accompaneys Mr William Cooper, from whom I have received the Royall Companyes Fort and Factory of Winneba, inventoryes whereof he brings with him. Also my Agga accompts, with one mark three ounces fifteen angles five taccoes gold I have left with Mr Browne, desireing him to put the same in his gold chest and send by the Sally Rose or other good oppertunity for Cabo Corso. Here are several! things wanting in the Fort, especially nailes and Gunners stores for supply, I referr you to Mr Cooper. I am much out of order and soe lame in my hands I cannot help myself. Winebah , 2 July 16971148. Thomas Buckeridge and 261hultimo came to hand, the former whereof haveYours of the 16th fulfilled, soc farr as I could, and delivered to Capt. Piles 135 what he was willing to take on board, vizt eighty seaven broad chints, or pintadoes, haveing received them for such, and shall endeavour to comp ly with your latter, haveing sent to Accroome, where the Negroes are now, and [I) have for a considerable time since been working them, having been here disturbed by the Anguinas , who have lately destroyed Barracue, for what reason I cannot be rightly advised; 36 the fear whereof hath occasioned our women to leave the towne, and beleive before they retume our Cabbosheers will be at considerable expence. I want goods (vizt) perpetuanoes, powder, sheets &ca for some Arkim traiders who are here. Your linguist Quo I beleive does the Company more barme than good by his rouguish pallavours, also corrupts my servants and devotes them more to his owne service than mine, which being very ill and weak cannott hinde r. My Serjeant, Gunner and two souldiers are ill of a feavour and ague, and for my self, have not been well one hour since my being here, but almost continually lightheaded, that am many times unsenceable of what I doe, wherefore desire you will take me for Cape Coast, or send some person to be a second or assistant, wh ile I am in this condition, for am not able to take care my self as I ought neither of the Companyes nor my own concerns. PS. Our souldiers troub le me much for their two months pay, which have not for them. Wee want spung nailes, English and country match, some tarr and tarbrush, granadoes, twine, and a block for the ft.aggstaff, also thread for the cartridges. 1149. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 20 July 1697 Yours of the 16th instant came to hand, with 4 chests mentioned to containe 360 sheetts, 100 blew perpetuanoes, one caske mentioned to containe 150 dozen knives, allso Mr Anderson to remaine as second. Sirs, when I wrote my last all matters semed indiferently well, but since the Dutch have been dealing with the Blacks about us and by their gold have corupted severaJI of them, by which means [and) allso the want of vendible goods have draw ne the traders (mentioned in my last) to their factory of Apung. 137 Wherefore desire you wiJI please to send money for the payment of our soldiers, who are in great want thereof, haveing four months pay due to them, and have been extreamly importunate with me therfore. In my last wrote you concerning the knavish tricks of your linguaster, which you were not pleased to notice. I djd not think proper to send you the slaves you wrote for until I had acquainted you with the present affaires, it being now the time to fetch shell to build our spurr and finish the fort, the men being allso needfull as times are for the preservation therof, shouJd there be occasion. Nevertheless per returne of the sloop 138 if your pleasure shall send them. Sirs, I am in want of powder, haveing but little in the Castle, also some good armes, some hand granadoes, spunge nailes, sheepskins and a block for the flagstaff. The Anguines have great differance amongst themselves about panyaring the Barracoe people, insomuch I am this morning advised they are embroyled in civill warrs, and wi ll shortly have a fight. I suppose the Dutch gold has been amongst them allso. When he was downe here Attabo, at the time of Mr Coopers goeing, offered for tenn bendys to drive the Dutch from Apung, which by reason of my sickness forgott to advise till now. fnclosed goes a petition from Richard Hearding. 139 PS. Here is some come belonging to the Company received from Mr Cooper, which unless disposed will be in a short time good for nothing. Per the canoe I have sent you one [ms. 'owne'] crowe, four malls, two axes, one shovel!, also one muskitt out of order. I am much lightheaded, which makes me desire to come for Cabo Corso, where if you please shall serve you the remainder of my time. 1150. Thomas Buckeridge Winnebah, 16 Aug. 1697 This comes to desire a supply of the ammunition allready wrote for, allso money to pay our souldiers, haveing near six months due to them, the want thereof occasions them to grow troublesome and mutinous to that degree I cannot bear, and as times are it very much encourages the Companyes eneimics to execute all sin[i]ster designes they may consceive against your interest, wherof by reason of what eledgcd [= alleged] in my last I fear to many are on foott, and wee in but a bad condition to withstand them. I suffered soe much for Dickies Cove, I desire, allso resolve not to undergoe the same here. 140 Mr Anderson by reason of sickness hath not nor is in condition to support the troubles of this, which referr to your consideratio n. 1151. Thomas Buckeridge Winnebah, 26 Aug. 1697 Yours of the 22d ultimo I received, but no money to defray the factory charge, which how should maintaine it self cannot understand, when your Dutch neighbours are so open handed to your blacks about us that they may obstruct our trade &ca, and doe us mischeif, being fearful! whereof in our last wrote for amunition &ca, that wee might be in a condition to defend ourselves should any disorder happen, which not haveing received I trouble you againe therefore. The other day our centinell had liked to have been stabd at the gate for denying entrance to a number of Blacks when ordred to the contrary, whose part our Serjeant took and with his cane forct to drive them off. I beleive he has received a dose thetfore, 141 being taken with a vomitting and trange paines of which he now very ill. Our Gunner alJso. The souJdiers are extreamly importunate for their pay, whetfore again de ire it may be sent. The Winnebah Cabbosheer refuse to bring shells , putting m off with idle excuses , which beleve may be till such time the season be gon. Have not sent the slaves you wrote for, being very apprehencive of enshuing trouble , who being present may on occasion assist to defend us & the Companyes interest agmnst our eneimies. I hear they are settling a factory upon the hill where our fir t house wa , but what nation know not, tho may guess hard. 142 Allso that suddenly the Queen comes down. 1152. Thomas Buckeridge Winnebah , 28 Aug . 1697 Yours of the 26th instant (with three marks gold) came to hand, wherein I notice your Honors pleasure concerning the canoe hire, which mus[t] submitt to, tho conceive my usagge therein to be very hard, since both the other canoe and this to come may be employed to bring no more than what wa necessary for the Royall Company Fort here, and therefore the charge no greater then had they at first been sent againe . Since I had a powetfull and sufficient reason for what I did, I have advised you that I am not in a condition to continue in this employ , which you please not to notice , and I further give you to understand that two of my security is broke , and therefore am unfitting to be tru ted. You are plea ed to think my corre pondence with the Blacks is not as it ought to be. Since you are the only judge in that respect, shall only alledge my indisposition for my excuse, tho to my knowledge I have not been guilty of any offence to them, unless in not giveing them that little I have , wherefore humbly desire may come for Cape Coast , if not to remaine at least to getc ome remedy for my illnes, when shall atisfie you what part of my Agga ballance remains unpaid, allsoe concerning the provitions from Captain Pepperell, 143 which [I] left Mr Haleywell, whose estate ' hould pay it, 144 save a small quantity expent before my comeing away, which in rea on ought to be allowed in, being on the souldiers. [gap in correspondence, Sept. & Oct. 1697] 1153. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 14 Nov. 1697 Yours of the 20th ultimo I received, and notice it's contents, which occasions me to advise that dureing the time I am yet oblidged to serve the Royall Company shall not faile to take what care I can of your concerns, hoping your assistance thereto will not be wanting, having not yet to my knowledge neglected my duty therein, which doubt not when convenient lo make appeare, tho' my encouragement bas not been as was promised and agreed for. The reason I trouble you herewith is to desire you will please to send the goods last wrote for as soone as possible, the want whereof (last pay day) forced me to disburst considerable of my owne towards payment of our people. Accroon[ = Accoon] 145 and the Accroome Cabbosheers hath been with me to offer you a settlement at Apong, and desire your answer. Attabo and the Winneba's have ended their Barracoe pallavers, and are now friends, he having been with me to desire the Anguinnas may be supplyed with powder, gunns and lead barrs, they being with the Ai.kims in annes against Quambo and expect shortly to fight. 146 I have been forced to spare him and Tettuba [ms. 'ffctuba'] some of the powder you last sent, which couJd not avoid unless 1 had fallen out with him, they aledging upon settleing this place your agreemen t was to procure them powder when they shall need. I have 130 butts shells by me, which thought propper to acquaint you. You were pleased to grant Richard Hornings petition, and he expected to have gone home, for which he is much discontented. I formerly wrote you for carpenters toolcs, mawls &c, which wee much want, also an hour glass. PS. Pray please to let me come to Cabo Corso three or four dayes, being much indisposed. 1154. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 24 Nov. 1697 I received both yours of the 18th and 20th inst.ant, with the goods therein mentioned. The Dutch have withdrawne the Factory al Apom, and I beleive are gone to settle at Alampo. 147 PS. Have by the canoe sent three slaves on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company (vizt) one man and two women slaves. USS. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 2 Dec. 1697 This accompanyes Captain Quanso, from whose importunityes could not be freed, untill he optained this, being to desire a settlement may be made for the Royall Company at ms croome. You may be further sattisfied from himselfe. 1156. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 8 Dec. 1697 I have received one hundred iron barrs and four casks rumme. The latter is of little use, our negroes here will not drink thereof. Sirs, being not well, and having no one to assist, cannot make my accompts while [=u ntil] Christmas. 1157. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 15 Dec. J697 I received yours of the 13¥h instant by Mr Whlte in the Cabo Corso Gally, whome had loaded with shell could I have procured canoes, having no great ones here, and the Negroes unwilling to imploy, therefore desire you will please to send one for that purpose. Sirs, you have not so offten writt for accompts as I have desired to be freed from this charge, which by reason of sickness I have been scarce able to beare. My excuses have been suffitiently warrantable, which to my imployers can make appeare. It shows your service very meane when persons find it harder to be discharged then to optaine preferment. I will assure you, Sirs, that I find my selfe (through sickness) unable to manage my business as I ought, wherefore I pray remove me, and shall never desire anythlng more in this service. Sirs, what I write and begg of you is not through any disrespect, for to the utmost of my power, shall serve you. PS. I have by this canoe sent a woman slave. Also on the 20tt¥ultimo by the great canoe did send one man, two women. 1158. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 15 Jan. 1697 [= 1698] This accompanyes Capt. White, whome have loaded with shell. The red cloath you mention have received also have put on board the said White, and two Black sawyers. Being indisposed with my voyage 148 doe not enlarge, refering to next for accompts &ca, with many thanks for my late good entertainme nt. 1159. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 30 Jan. 1697 /8 This accompanyes my accompts for Winneba to ultimo this instant, the ballance whereof is three marks four ounces fifteen angles due to factory charge. The Blacks here report that the Dankeryes and Arcanyes will fight these boone dayes, whereof next Monday will be the farthest.149 They [= the Arcanyes] have brought a large fettish from Cuttrecoe lo pawne for gunns, 150 which have not for them. Here is no trade stiring, and our perpetuanoes al I la will hardly pass for ten angles. The powder if in halfe or quarter barrells would be good, but as it is does not sell. 1 have no penknife nor paper by me, wherefore must begg it of you before I send duplicates of my accompts. PS. The red cloath I brought downe is hardly twenty and a halfe yards as measured by myselfe and Serjeant when opened, neither is it marked more on the buckram. 151 1160. Thomas Buckleridge Winneba, 11 Feb. 1697/8 l received yours of the 8th instant; your orders wherein to utmost of my power shall observe, but how to make twenty and a halfe yards of cloath hold out for twenty three and a halfe I know not, unless you will please that I make a certificate therefore. I have not received the writeing paper you mention, neither doe you take notice of what is due to factory charge by my accompts, so that pay day being againe at hand know not how to sattisfie the soulcliers and slaves. Here is little trade for the sorts of goods J have, wherefore desire you to supply me with sheets and basons. 1161. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 9 March 1697/8 This accompanyes Doctor Gervis Jackson, bringing inclosed an inventory of this factory, taken by him and Mr Josiah Pearson 152 according to order, duplycates whereof could not write, having then noe more then this sheet paper you now receive in the fort, therefore hope you will excuse me, and shall observe your pleasure therein. áIntending speedily to send a two hand canoe. PS. I know not what shift to make for a pennknifc. 1162. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 12 March 1697/8 Yours of the 5111ultimo came to hand, with two marks two oz scaven angles six taccoes gold towards ballance of my accompts ro ultimo January, the receipt whereof did not by Doctor Jackson advise. l perceive you have stopped the money due to Agga factory, for which returne you thanks and am well sattisfied, tho' believe there was no necessity for the reflection [on] me therefore, when alwayes imagined and if not much mistaken desired my sallery might pay itt, but since otherwise, please to send it me, being for 18 months from the 2d August 1696 to 2d last instant, and is I presume £50 sterling. I observe you stopp 1oz la for hire of a 13 hand canoe, which thought had attisfied you about it, however it is both unrea onable and unjust that I should pay for bringing downe the Companyes powder, granadoe shells, stores &ca which came by her, wherefore hope you will allow me for that. I have once before writt you the red cloath was noe more then 20. yard , and that I offered two and a halfe to each Cabbosheer , but would not be accepted, wherefore since I must be appeached [= impeached) to the Company, as will not be the fu t time , shall take certificates for my defence, and beleive if I am an offender shall not be the only one in Guinea. Duplicate s of my accompt will end so soone as possible, having been hindered hitherto by Attaboe, who hath been here a considerable time much to my expence, and is now gone to Accroome to settle matters, for fear of the Dankeryes, who are reported to be in armes against the Arcanyes. According to yours of the lst instant , sent up the GalJey with she11s. Also by this canoe a woman slave, who has been a long time sick and unserviceable . 1163. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 16 April 1698 Yours of the 16th ultimo came to hand, the contents whereof I observe, and am heartily sorry for so generall a decay of trade, also the Companyes neglect of supplyeing with such goods as are vendable , wherefore desire you will plea e to send me some knives and tallow by fir t opportunity. Our business is so small cannot defray the charge of the factory , which makes me very uneasie, being dayly importuned by the souldiers &ca, if not paid at their due times, insomuch that I shall not know what to doe, having not wherewithal! of my owne therfore, and indeed if anybody ought to disburst for the Company, such as have received extraordinary favours should not be wanting, wherein doe not beleive my selfe to be concerned. PS. In the coppy of my accompts to ultimo January (through mi take) have omited the corrall , wherefore desire to know whither in that at Cabo Corso , it is mentioned. 1164. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 19 April 1698 James Debow yesterday in the evening did absent himselfe from the fort and was not to be found in the towne or bushe adjoyning, wherefore somwhat affter the usuall time shutt our gates, defering our search till this morning, which appearing sent one of my boyá to Appom, to enquire of him there, who being denyed by the Copeman153 was casually seen of the boy, but not returned, wherefore have sent this purposely to advise, and know your worshipps pleasure therein. He has been a very troublesome fellow, and not fitt to live in an outfactory. 1165. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba , 25 April 1698 I received yours of the 2 1st instant, wherein according to yow-custome (through some ill minded grudge) I find you much harpe on my duty , without any neglect to my knowledge, wherefore cannot perceive your reason, unless to buggbeare me, for I presume have not omited any thereof, by demanding my sallery, which expected before (or at least by this time), according to yours of the 16th ultimo, and thereby should have been better [en]abled to have bore the factory charge untill accompts made, which fear not you shall speedily have, wherefore it is my sallery [omission] I did then mention concerning the Company is true, and no reflection as you tearme it. I doe not boast to have done them extraordinary service , neither have I received any favour to encourage me thereto, nor even what I agreed with them for, and I doe not think its worth my labour to apply my selfe to them therefore, or when my time expi red worth my acceptance. Nott Jong since you sent me about sixty gallons of rurnme, which to please you was forced to accompt for a hundred, although am oblidged to purchase brandy to give the Negroes for quiettness sake, which refuse and will not drink the other, whereby my sallery being much diminished, also not paid when required, and having no profitt can scarce live, yett notwithstanding I am dayly taunted and abused when I offer my ju st demands, for which reason affter Christma s intend home, God willing, which occasions me to trouble you so much herein, that with my sallery I may partly discharge my debts, that thereby I may not be abstructed [= obstructed]. In my last I wrote you that Debow was with the Dutch at Apom, and refused my message, who [I] desire, if sent back, may not remaine here, being not to be governed at an out factory. Attaboe and the Anguinnas are alread y gone to assist the Arcanyes. 154 PS. Pray, Sirs, advise whether in my last accompt have omited the corrall. 1166. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba , 31 May 1698 I received yours of the 16th instant, with one to Capt. Martin, 155 which delivered, and herewith have sent accompls to the present date, the ballance being Ja 3t due to factory charges. I had nott money for our souldiers &ca further then 25th Febbruary, and pay day being againe atl hand they will have four months due to them, which desire you will send by returne of this canoe, or know nott how they may be sattisfied, for att present they dayly trouble me therefor e. I shall nott dispute your actions nor designes, whither pa11iall or noe, which time to uninterested per on will shortly make appear. The grant you give Thomas Tunnbridge , a private souldier and in health, who comes herewith, more for hi intrest in tradeing then other re pect s, and the many deniall s wherewith my requests of coming to Cabo Corso have been offten repulsed att times when I might have offten been pared , notwithstanding they were forced and back ' d with the most urgent and necessitious reasons, of violent and extraordinary sickness, may I beleive, in every judicious man's opinion, savour somthing of partiallity . 1167. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 9 [June) 1698 156 I have received yours of the 7th instant , and perceive the error in my accompts, which not being ent desire you will please to add two ounces corrall to the debtor side and the remains thereof, makeing the same 107 and 62, which shall notice in my next accordingly. You should not faile of monthly accompts were there trade, or anything to accompt off. I perseive that you have little reason to fear my running out , and Jess of any other dealings , as the times att present are. Sirs, this comes, in complyance to your order, for money to pay your souldiers &ca, which will have four months due to them , wherefore shall refer to your wisdome and my accompts for what will be needfull. Both my temper and custome is undoubtedly like other men' , when abused to endeavour my justification, and when ill u ed to complaine , untill by some means may have redress, which doubt not one way or other in short time to obtaine, if some extraordi.nary preventions doe nott intervene . I am noe judge of your dealing s, nor can I censure you in a matter relateing to my selfe. How ver can be sencible of my ill usage, and know noe reason therefore. I have offten desired my sallery, which doe once more, for having perused my agreement with the Company, find my selfe under noe obligation of duty or service unless paid yearly, wherefore if it must still be unpaid desire liberty to goe off the Coa t by first conveyance in order to retume home, tho ' am desireous to serve the RoyalJ Company, yetl still unwillingly continue to be soe grossly abused as hitherto by their Cheifs. PS. I have herewith sent you a man lave for accompt Company . The man you sent lately hither hears his companion have sould hi che t and cloath , wherefore desires your favor therein , being much necessitated for want of them. 1168. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba , 17 June 1698 The bearer hereof was the other day putt on shore from a small West Country 157 bark, commanded by one Charles El lard , who being desireous to serve the Royall Company hath procured his passage to Cabo Corso in order for his application to you therefore. 1169. Thomas Buckeridge Winnebah, 30 June 1698 1 received yours of the 2 l st instant with two marks three angles and seaven taccoes gold to pay the souldiers to 17th ditto, also one mark five ounces two angles and six taccoes for eighteen months sallery from the 2d August 1696 to the 2dFcbbuary last 1697/8, haveing once before been paid for halfe a year, soe that the 2d August next shall have six months further due to me, at which time two years a halfe will be expired since my arivall in this country. Yesterday Accon sent one of his wives &ca to acquaint me that he would put the Dutch from Apom, haveing been thereby required by a messenger you lately sent from Cabo Corso, wherefore thought necessary to advise you, tho' doubt his performance. Sirs, this morning opening a bale perpetuanoes, number 8, find some of them to be much damaged. I notice what you sent me concerning the Cabbosheers &ca. Thave by this canoe sent you two men and one woman slaves for accompt Company, also Richard Homing, being much troubled with sickness &ca, goe[s] herewith, in whose roome desire another. 1170. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 9 July 1698 This comes to desire fifty blue perpetuanoes for accompt of the Royall Company, for whose ditto have sent two men, one woman slaves. If concerning my sallery Thave made a mistake, extraordinary sickness has been the occation, by which my memory has been and is soe shortned, I am almost uncapable of business, wherefore therein doe refer my selfe, trusting J shall not be injured. Sirs, one of our slaves named Coffe, the day affter being paid, goeing to Mumford to buy come with some knives he had received, was between that and Apom sett upon by one of the Dutch boys and two of their slaves, who killed him with more then 25 stabbs in his body, also cutting his neck round to the bone. I sent the Winneba's &ca to bury him there, and demand sattisfaction. Quanso and Tutuba also doe the same, which I hope and beleive may put them from thence, if you will give any thing therefore, without which Blacks palavers are faust [sic: =false?], and little worth. 158 Winneba, 18 July 16981171. Tho mas Buckeridge Have both yours of the 13th and 151" instant, the former whereof arived somewhat too late. Quanso and Accoonc, who three or four dayes did lye before Apom, not hearing from you, had delivered the murderer of Cuffee to the Dutch Coaprnan, haveing received six bendyes therefore, as I am informed. However, sent Linguister Quo to the latter [= Accoone] with your pallaver, which told him the business was not then ended, notwithstanding what they had received, but that he intended to execute his prorni e in turning them off, provided he could be secure of your settleing there when done, which would help to excu e his action with the Accrong Cabbo heers, espetiaUy such a had pawnes at the Mina, wherefore he required that in order thereto you would send some white men to Quansaws Croome, the better to dispose the people, untill it should be effected.159 Haveing received the above mentioned answer, I sent him with some liquor to ollicitt Tutteba &ca, who seemed to be well pleased and promised to comply with your de ires, demanding three perpetuanoes and a halfe barrell powder, which have just delivered to Prince and her messengers, who are thi night to returne, and make preparation therefore , which being ended tenn bendyes will very weU thank them. They send for Accoone, with whome they intend to confederate herein, and intend in the next week, the boon daye beginning then. I much want some brandy for this affair or cases of spirits, which desire by returne of my canoe. The latter being offten required will ell, or if none can purchase of Mr John Davis, in a sloope from Barbadoes 160 what will bee ne dfull, if you plea e to allow i.t. He is now a little to leward of this road with the company. 161 Also a Dutch interloper advises that on the Graine Coast he spoke with a great English Companys shipp. I have sent you two men, one woman slaves for ditto accompt on accompt of ditto. PS. J have related to you all particulars , but leave the judgement of it's reall[i]ty to your wisdome, haveing been offten deceived in Blacks pallaver , but am of opinion it may have it's de ired effect. 1172. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 25 July 1698 Have received both your of the 17th and 22d instant, with eight pair Negro irons. Also hearing that some Arl<imtraders are arived, and others suddenly expected at Unguinna [= Anguinna], desire (in complyance to your orders) to be supplyed by first opportunity with goods mentioned as at foot hereof, or such of them as you have or can pare, for accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. I bear P1ince hath offered himselfe to rernaine at Apom affter the busine shall be compleated, until! you send there to ettl . Attaquo the other day brought downe fettishe , and put in the ground, demanding for the fettisher half a perpetuanoe, which being delivered he returned, haveing fir t assured me they had received encouragement therefrom. I have by this canoe sent you one man, two women slaves, also four pair of shakles unserviceable. PS. Goods: 12 chests sheets, 2 three pounds pewter basons, screwed juggs, quarter ban-ells powder if any, cases of spirits, tapseils, nicconeese and woollen carpets, red perpetuanoes, pintadoes and paper brawJes, blue plaines, pautkies white and blue Guinea clouts, some more iron ban-s, white blanketts, a piece of blue cloath for Cabbosheers and long cloath for a flagg. Sirs, I must desire you will please to use the come here for the first occations, or in a small time if not already it will be good for little or nothing. I want ink, paper and penknife. I have sent the coppyes of my accompts. I desire if any letters for me you will please to give them my canoemen, one mentioned to be sent being not come. 1173. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 3 Aug. 1698 I wrote you on the first instant by Cabbosheer Ball, who with George Devonport the last night went to Accoone, neare Apom,162 to assure them of their realty in the ensuing affair, and the latter to remaine with him as a pledge, therefore I presume it now is or will suddenly reach your hands, to which, for fmther advice I must at this time refer you. Quansaw is at present with me and intends for Accron tomorrow. The occation herefore to desire the goods wrote for soe soon as possible, more particularly the sheets and some powder, of which have not one barrell in the fort, and much wanted. I have herewith sent you a man and a woman slaves, for Companys accompt, and desire a white man instead of the above mentioned. PS. I hope wee shall have a considerable trade. I have severall slaves, which by first shall send you. 1174. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 5 Aug. 1698 Yours of the 3d instant I received and notice, in complyance wherewith shall endeavor what I can to procure a canoe for Whidah voyage of the Prince of Orange, 163 butt fear too little effect, unless you please to spare that I bought for the Royall Company, and remains here for the use of this factory, which Capt. Daniells carpenter has seen and very well likes. She is somewhat damaged by a splitt she received near her head, in caITying of shell when the seas ran high, but may well be mended, and is far better as he sayes then any at Cabo Corso. Your last to me was the 30th ultimo, since which have wrote you the ls\ 3d,4th and this the 5th instant, to which refer you. 164 Serjeant Sulton hath wrote a petition to goe home, which upon his requesthave here inclosed. 1175. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 14 Aug. 1698 Haveing sent you four letters which are unanswered, with six men and sixwomen slaves by the last two hand and great canoe, the 3dand 5th instant, foraccompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England, and which you have notyetl noticed, also being in want of the goods I have desired, with some tallow, is the occation hereof, to desire your dispatch herein, as soone as possible. Accoonehath sent twice he will be suddenly with the white man, near Appom. 165 PS. I have some good slaves by me, and loth to send untill I bear from you. 1176. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 23 Aug. 1698 I received yours of the 17th instant, with the goods therein mentioned, and as percontents, save one halfe case spirits, being forced lo fill up the other (that hadbeen opened and stole) therewith, I presume rstolen] in their passage from CaboCorso here, as two chests of your sheets and some iron barrs would also a beenhad I not much stirred therein, for they were denyed by the sloops master, who Isuppose intended them for himselfe, or next Barbadoes interloper. Sirs, byreason of the many pa\lavers and much business have not been able to finish myaccompts, but the latter end of this month if you please, shall send them.I presume you have new Factors suffitient for your occations, therefore if youshall send one to discharge me this employ, shall be much oblidged to you, for ina little time I dcsigne home, and after the 2d February next will nott stay in thisservice. PS. Since writeing the afforegoeing, haveing some occation to open caskspewter, found them to be both one pound basons, wherefore desire by this canoesome of two pounds. 1177. Thomas Buckcridge Winneba, 27 Aug. 1698 I received yours of the 23ct and 24th instant, wherein I notice your ordersconcerning the spiritts, which shall comply with in the cases {that) remains,being noc more then three of the large sort, but am sorry for the mistake that hashappened. This comes to desire a larger supply of tallow, which is now wanted, the former being disposed, with some more of the halfe cases spiritts and the musquets you mention, which are not yett come. I observe your pleasure in the business of Appom, and shall doe my utmost as well to serve my masters as to reveng[e] the unspeakable injurys have received from those villaines. 166 I dare beleive Anguinna will performe their parts, and if not as you would have itt, Quanza, who have highly treated therefore, and Accoone will be the only hinderance, wherefore beleive itt necessary for you to deale with them. I have by this canoe sent a man and woman slave for Companys accompt, and have some others by me which if you please will putt on board the Prince Orrange, to whome have sent your great canoe, and is yett to windward takeing of corne.167 I beleive shall have money to ballance my accompts at end of thls month, which if soe desire if I shall send itt by a two hand canoe herewith, or wait your orders, by reason the seas are dangerous, and my canoe had like lately to have been robbed. PS. Pray send me paper to write. I shall now be glad of your discharge, for my present being here is by force and against my will much. [gap in correspondence, Sept. to Dec. 1698] 1178. Thomas Buckeridge Winneba, 11 Jan. 1698/9 I sent you by the Fauconberge nine men with t\vo women Gold Coast, allso two men, eight women Ardah slaves, the receipt off which you did not notice. However have made my accornpts accordingly to ultimo December, which comes inclosed. Also have sent herewith one woman slave, to compleat the ballance of the slaves therein mentioned. The ballance of gold due to the Royall Company amounts to mks8 5oz 9a 9t, which have sealed up and remaines for your order. The Fauconberge sailed before had oppertunity of putting it on board. I earnestly desire you will supply us soe soone as possible with men and armes, the fonner being partly ill, some of them nott and others hardly able to doe their duty, the latter have none fitt for service, whereby tho' in a fort shall nott be able to defend either the Companys intrest or ourselves. I am sorry for the death of Mr William Cooper. 1179. Thomas Bucke1idge Winneba, [20?]168 Jan. 1698/9 l wrote you on the llm instant, with which sent my accompts to ultimo December, the ballance whereof, amounting to eight marks five ounces nine .. J ... ..,., .., ..JV..J angles nine taccoes, remains for your order. My canoe nott being yett returnedwith your answer occasions me to advise hereof by this, which is chiefely toacquaint you on the 17th instant came hither the Queen and Attaboe, whoyesterday opened their pallaver, and desired (as I once before wrote) you wouldtrust them twelve bendys, to be stopped from the former untill repaid by hermonthly rent, which nott haveing a power to consent to, she was extravigantlypationa te, telli ng me the Engli sh had killed Great Taggee, 169 caused theDancra's to panyar Attaboc, 170 had allmo st brought them on her country, 171 andthat wee desired to loose our trade, however in the end was pretty weU pacifiedwhen Jpromised to write and intreat you therefore, for which reasons I earnestlydesire, as J have before done, thatt you will supply us with men and armes (ofwhich there are butt three can doe duty) soe sped ily as you can, for shouldanything be offered wee are nott in a condition of defence. Pray send yourresolution in the above written aJJair, and accordingly Jett us be prepared for anyaccident thatt may happen, for I verily beleive if her demands arc refused shewill offer violence to the Companys concerns here. 1180. Thomas Buckerid ge Winncba , 6 Feb. 1698 [= 1699] Yours of the 24th and 27th ultimo came safe to hand, and your orders therein (tothe utmost of my power) were complyed with, for accordingly thereto have sentto Unguina Queen the six bendys you allow of, with which sbee seemedreasonably well sattisfied, and has promised to repay it with the first six monthsrent that shall become due to her, from the 27 th last instant, as by her inclosedreceipt you may perceive. Attaboe &ca hath been busie with me for small lone [= loan] (which,haveing noe powe r therefore, could not comply with). He is now gone toAccroone , intending to retume in 7 or eight dayes, and build a habbitation nearWinneba, being very much dissatisfied with severall of the country people, forsundry abuses they have offered to his concernes there the time he was absent. 172 I have received your six musquet s and twelve granadoes. The four whitemen you mention are also arived here with their two musquets.I have waited for the returne of the slope from Accra, but I presume she ispast by or not come from thence, wherefo re have not as yell had a conveniencyof sending up the Companys money thereby according your orders. However ifsbee should not be come up, and calls on me therefore in her retume , shall besure to put it on board. The time I contracted to serve the Royall Affrican Company of England was expired on Thirsday last, being the 2dof this instant, and my selfe (by reason of sickness and want of necessary remedys) being very unable to continue any longer in lhis imploy, also some affaires requireing my returne for England, I desire you will please to discharge me thereof, and give me liberty to come for Cabo Corso in order to have my passage home by the first good oppo rtunity. [Ps] Herewith you will receive nine musquetts which is out of order. Winneba, 15 Feb. 1698/91181. Thomas Buckeridge I received your base and injurious letter of the 11th instant this morning, and must tell you (tho' contrary to my inclination) I have [a Jetter] from under your hands for lone of six bendys the Queen had, and other suffitient proofes therefore, which will undoubtedJy discharge me. However cannot butt notice your fraudulent indeavours lherein, which being corresponde nt with your olher abuses, as I can make appeare, must tell you that I at this instant am not oblidged, neither will I serve to be abused nor endeavour to give you any further sattisfaction therein then receipt from under hers, Quo('s], and my Serjeants hands may give to any reasonableApparaco['sl, person, more especially when their order has been therefore. I must tell you that my usage has been most meane and unworthy since my being upon this Coast of late, which I can in divers manners make appeare, and shall not fear standing to, wherefore I doe here declare and protest that by reason of the unaccomptab le and manyfold abuses, and likewise your consistance therein, when especially soe civilly my discharge was desired, I am fearfulJ your designes are to prejudice of my life, and that fatle estate God has been pleased to bestow on me, which the almighty providence I hope may protect, and send me clear from such villany shall be both the endeavo ur and praye rs of [myself]. [PS] You take noe notice of the receipts I sent you in my last, inclosed, nor any thing that makes against your humour. It is sufficientmy care has been to procure her agreement as by my last, but for renew ing it is yours. You keep my canoes soe unreasonable long before you will vouchsafe to answer the Companys business that [I] can hardly procure any to serve you. Winneba, 23 Feb. 1698/91182. Thomas Buckeridge This accompanys John Gonsolvus, who some time since had the mjschance to hurt his foot, which for want of necessary means for its cure is in a very bad condition, wherefore on his request have permited him to come to Cabo Corso, that it may the better be healed 