XIII WHYDAH The section of the coast east of the River Volta, compnsrng the Bight of Benin, was often called the 'Slave Coast', although this term was perhaps not yet established in English usage, since it does not occur in the Rawlinson corres.pondence.1 The RAC's factory in this region was in the kingdom of Hueda, or 'Whydah' (also 'Widah' etc.), in the modern Republic of Benin; it was situated at the coastal village of Glehue (modern Ouidah), rather than the royal capital Savi (referred to in these documents as 'the King's town'), 11 km inland.2 In 1687 the RAC had contracted the Whydah factory out to a former interloper called Petley Wyborne, but after the latter died in 1690 it was again brought under the direct control of the Company.3 As the name 'Slave Coast' implies, this region was solely important for trade in slaves; Whydah was indeed at this period the main centre of English slave-trading, accounting in the 1690s for over a third of all English purchases.4 Although the Whydah factory was occupied continuously through the 1690s, relatively few letters from it were recorded at Cape Coast, only fourteen surviving in the Rawlinson corpus for 1691-9. This reflected difficulties of communication, due to the prevailing winds and currents, which meant that European ships calling at Whydah regularly proceeded east along the coast, rather than back westwards to the Gold Coast.5 Voyages directly up the coast could be made in African canoes, 6 but these normally made the journey only on a seasonal basis, during the hannattan season (December Lo January), when winds and currents were more favourable to a westward journey. 7 The Dutch WIC had a factory at Offra, in the neighbouring kingdom of Allada ('Arda'), 30 km east of Whydah; when this was destroyed in a local war earl.yin 1692, they initially attempted to relocate to Whydah, but withdrew soon afterwards (nos 1343, 1345-6). The French Guinea Company had a factory in Whydah itself, but this was also destroyed later in 1692, after which the Fre nch pre ence lapsed , leaving the EngJish for a few years as the only European nation with a local estabhshment. 8 The Dulch WIC, however, estab lished a factory at Whydah io 1698, as recorded in this correspondence (uo.1354). French trade at Whydah had also resumed by 1698 (ibid.), although a permanent factory was noL re-established unlil a few years later .9 Relations among Europea ns in Whydah were complicated by the war in Emope between 1689-97, leading the English fort to fire on the French in 1692, which in turn provoked the seizure of the chief of Lhe English factory by the French, and his deportation by the local authorities (nos 1343-4). This clash also occasioned the fortification of the Whydah factory, which was henceforth regarded as a 'fort' .10 The operation of European trade was also affected by local African conflicts which are recorded in this correspondence. During 1690-1 trade had been disrupted by the rebellion of Offra, supported by Whydah, against its overlord Allada, leading to the closure of roads from the interior to the coast. 1,1 The situation was further complicated by Lhe rise of the new state of Genyi (called 'Little Popo' by Europeans), on the coast 50 km west of Whydah, founded by refugee s from the Akwamu conque t of Accra, on which the Rawlin on corres.pondence provides invaluable docuruentation. 12 It was forces from Popo, operating in aUiance wjth AJlada, which destroyed Offra at the beginning of 1692, and attacked Whydah later in the same year (nos 1343, 1346). The conespondence also record subsequent war between Litt! Popo and the Adangme ('Allampo'), eLtled in the Anlo region, further west on the coat, in 1693-5 (no 1349, 1352), and between Whydah and Great Popo , east of Little Popo, in 1694 (no.1349). During this period, the disorders at Whydah, combined with the availability of captives from .these wars further west, recurrently diverted European trade from Whydah to Little Popo, but Whydah remained the most important place of trade. 1342. John Wortley Whydah, 5 Jan. 1691/2 This is to acquaint your Worships of the an-ivall of Capt. Thomas Sherley and Capt. John Edwards, Commanders of the East India Merchant and Kendle Frigatt, who came to anchor the 28th June. Likewise the Supply, Capt. James Lashley, came here the 17th August, with Mr Edward Jackline as second, 13 and a cargoe amounting to 200lb:03:04 [= £200.03.04] consigned to me for your Worships. They carried off in all from hence 1150 merchantable slaves, where of 124 men was shipped aboard the Supply,14 and departed this road in company togither the 7th September, without the losse [of] any men but one, which was one of Capt. Edwards men, the boat being put of from the ship went a great way from the ship to the leeward & rowing up to windward againe was drove ashore by bad weather and soe was drounded. Mr Humphries departed from hence in good health, 15 but have understood since by a Portiguize shipp he was verey dangerously sick and vomited neer 2 quarts of blood the time he was ashore at St Thomas. A ll pallavors that we had formerly with the country is done, and now doe leave [=live] very peaceably with the King and country, without any more pallaveroes. 16 We are all in good health at this present, which I pray God to containow soe. I hope your Worships will be pleased to consider the cargoe you sent consigned per Capt. Lashley will but little more then pay every man his sallery, besides the expence of Factory &ca, which is not verie small, and goe as neer as possible I can. Before you sent me these goods down, here was but a verie little left in the Factory, which have sent your Worshipps the coppie as we were apprasid by Capt. James Lashley, Mr Thomas Mead, Mr Benjamin Sherley, Mr William Jones and Mr Christopher Price. Besides was forcied by the request of James Lashley to disburse 33 iron ban-s and 32 pautkies out of the cargoe you sent me, for to deffray charge of canoe hier and other expence, by reasone of his cargoe falling short, which he hath given me recipt for under his hand and witnessed by Christopher Price and Benjamin Sherley for the delivery of the goods, and shall place it to the Royall Companies accompt. 17 I desire your Worships to send me ane accompt how I shall pay the white menhere their salJary, which must be in goods, for your Worships do verie wellknow that there is no gold to be had to pay them worth [=with) all, they say ifthey take goods they do expect them at prime coast. 18 Sirs, what news we hearis that the Dutch is doeing their indeavour to put the English out of these parts,by makeing their pallaviros with the IGng of Whydah to come and settle here,and that they designe to take [the) Factory that was formerly Capt. Whybornesfor to live in, 19 which l have after his dec[e]ase rebuilt, a pritty large house, by reasone the Blacks in the country did pull the old house all downe, therefore [I]did do this for to put a Black that is one of Olfrys great Cabboosheers, an Accrarnan,20 into it and to pay him 4ac per month to stand by me on all occasions orpalJaveroes, he is a man very honest and true to his trust to the English att alltimes. I am now almost able to defend ourselves against the Dutch and French ifthey should oppose us, for have placed two flanckers, which will clear the waUs round the Factory, that no enimey can come to hurt us, and as for Capt.Whybornes old house, if the Dutch come to live there I can soon beat them outwith the guns we have in the Factory, which is 7 in all, vizt 3 great guns and 2patereroes and 2 drakes,21 but do wish much that your Honours will be pleasedto send 3 or 4 of your great guns, about three or 4 hundred weight, likewiseshott answerable for them, which will be a great safeguard to the RoyallCompanies Factory. The French have been about building flanckers in theirhousejust over against us, which I seing did soon hinder him and made him pullit all down again. Have had a great many pallaviroes with him, but now prettywell qua[i]led him, and do much expect when a French ship comes here that weshall have a great many pallavroes with them. Gentlemen, as you havecontainowed me in my place as Cheife in the Royall African Companies servicein Whydah, and likewise have sent down Mr Edward Jack.line to be myassistant, for which, Sirs, I doe give you all many thanks, I shall be ever boundto pray for your health and prosperity, and do hope that the Royall Companymy masters will confirme it to me. I question not but most of you Gentlemen doknow my ability, therefor shall do nothing that may cause my Royall mastershindrance of the confirmation, but shall to the utmost of my power servethem with all faithfulness and honesty, as a servant ought to serve his master.Sirs, I desire you [if] there be any ships English on the coast to advice the Commander to dispose of the goods that are not vcndable hear to windward which are vizt. goods not vendablc ditto vendable trouncks [= tronks) Booges Sayes reed perpetuanocs or blew if a few iron barrsKnives rangoes if pail [= pale) brass neptunes large linnine [= linen)all sons paper braules a few Giinea clouts a few rangocs if a deep reed beads purple and what is large and round flowerd silks coral! if large guns and powder We are much in want of paper, ink and quills, Likewise a paper book to keep the accompt for we are very bear [= bare] at this time, and do hope that your Worships will consider to send them by the first oppertunity. Likewise a man or two more for to be hear. We have at present 4 white men with my self, and 2 of them but small help to me in bissincss, so shall leave it to your Worships consideration. 1343. John Wortley Whydah Factory, 17 Jan. 169l/2 Since my last to you, which [was] on the 5th instant, the Dutch Chief with 2 white men more came from Offra in a ship under pretence of buying slaves only, but his designc is likewise to settle here, which I indeavour to hinder as much as I can.22 They are now at the French Factory and intend to bring goods to their house. I sent to the Dutch man and told him he should neither buy slaves for his ship nor settle in the country, he sent me word that he would not ask my leave. Likewise I desi red the French to turne him out of bis Factory, or els l would fire into his house, but he presently histed his flagg and said he would send people to break downe our wall, upon which answer 1 fired several) great shott into ther factory, upon which several] Blacks they hired came towards our Factory, but I soon sent them back againe . The French formerly was building a flancker against us, but I soon made them pull it downe again, but now they are at work containualy to build on, but J have not powder nor shott to hinder them. We expect Offry every day upon this country, for not long since he sending some of his people from Offra, which place he had destroyed,23 the e people sett upon them and cut most of them off.24 1344. Edward Jackline Widah, 10 May 169225 This accompanie Mr John Anshworth,26 and is to acquaint your Worships of the strange revolutions that have hapned in these parts, for on the 21 Aprill last about 11 aclock at night Mr Wortly, goeing out to the French Factory here, was by the French men pinnyaird and keept prisoner in their house, and presently all the Gold Coa t Negroes here27 gott up in armes, o that we thought they were comeing to take the Factory, for Mr Wortly had panyaird 4 of them some time before and keept them in irons. The next day Mr Worthly sends me ane order to deliver the French men 2 marks gold, the value of 10 slaves in goods and six musquets. I sent him word again that for the gold and goods I would deliver, but I did not think it convenient to deliver the armes to an enemie that threatned to take the Factory, for by that means he might accomplish hi desire. He [i .. the French factor] said he would not have the goods except [= without] the armes, and that he would have them or Factory, so I immediatly acquainted the King what the French had done and what they designed, who ent me word again that I need not fear them, for they should not hurt the Factory, and I knew that without his assistance they could not. Sometime after the King askt him whither Mr Wotthly owed him anything, he said no, but he had been at great charge to gett people to watch and look after his Factory for fear of us, and withall told me what need I trouble myself so long as I had Mr Worthly order, for it was non of mine,for at last they would have taken the 2 mark of gold and 10 slaves in goods without the gunns, but then I would not give it them, I told them so long as he [= Wortley] wa hi prisoner he could make him notice what he pleased. I told the King if he would force me to give it I would, but I told him withal! if he suffredthe French to do so he must not expect us to tay long in his country, so the King told him he should have nothing. The French, seing they could gett nothing out of me, aid I would not give the things becau J would have him (= Wortley) keep there. Mr Answorth can acquaint your worships what I did, who spook very much for Mr Worthly against the French. I told the King he did not do well to suffer the French to do so. At the same ti.me I askt Lhe King why he suffred the French to pinnyajr Mr Worthly, he said it was by [ms. 'be'] his order, because he had correspondence with O.ffree,his enimie, and t.hreatned him that Offree should come and take his country, and for pinnyairing the interlopers canoe and canoemen, and severall other things, and that he would have [had] Mr Worthly out of his house by force before that time if it had not been for fear the rable should have plundr ed the Factory. Yet r indeavoured as much as I could for his inlargement, but all in wain, for they would not suffer me to see him. At last I desired the King to remove him to some other place, which he did, and sett him aboard an interloper, Capt. James Bruser,28 then lying at anchor in this road. I askt the Captain how he could answer carrieing the Companys Factors out of the country, he said the King forced him to do it. I know Mr Worthly and the Captai n had a falling out sometime before , which was the reason I believe he was so willing to carry him off. Whille Mr Worthly Jay at the French house he wrotte a letter to the King promiseing him a great dashee if he would end the pallavour, which he[= the King] forcied me to give him. I askt him why he wou ld take it, seeing he would not suffer Mr Worthly to stay, he said the Dutchmen that arc pinnyaird at Offra had given a great deall more and was neer the better, 29 so f was forcied to comply unlessc I would accompany Mr Worthly. I sec the letter he wrotte to the King (and Tbelieve Mr Answorth did), wherein he promised him 5 slaves, and 2 of them [i.e. 2 more] I was forcied to give him to remove him from the Frenchmans, for that he was keept in irons in a nesty place, so they have had 7 slaves already , and the Cabbosheers are now at me for somethi ng, and then I believe this bussines will be ended . Sometime before this bussinese Mr Worthly had pinnyaird a Gold Coast mans canoe for a debt which another owed, which canoe was brock bringing up to the Factory, so that they would be paid for it and will not take lesse then 2 slaves, and [there was also] one of the interlopers canoemcns hire, for which he [=Wo rtley] received gold and left me to pay them with goods. Perhaps may be some cxpencesse about this unlooky [= unlucky] bussines to gett people to look after the Factory (for we did expec t the French were come ing to take the Factory), and yett as little as possible could be. The King is resolved to have our flanckers [ms. 'planckers' ) down, and becaus I desired him Lostay till we had a shipp here he told me if I did not resolve upon it f should accompany Mr Worthly, but he said at the same time if I broak doun ours the French should break down theirs, who had built one spite of Mr Wortly, who resisted him very much.30 They [ = the Whydah people?] only waite for a French ship and its thought the Chief [sc. of the French factory] will be sent away likewise. They [ = the French] have not had a ship for these 2 years and they are alwayes quar[e)ling amongst themselves, especially the Chief and 2d, who pretends he is equall with the Chief. The 26 April Capt. Butterams mate came here from Little Popo with letters for Mr Wortly,3 1 but not your Worships letter, so I desired the King to Jett me send up to Popo by the river,32 but by no means would he suffer me, for he was affrayed I should send to Offree to come upon the country for what they had done to Mr Wortly, and the mate told me he could not tell me whither the ship would come doun or no. Slaves are very plenty here, for the 2 interlopers were dispatched in a month and carried of bettween them 1000 slaves, they departed hence the 3d instant, by whom I have wrotte to the Company concerning the affairs here.33 After Mr Worthly went off I had liberty to goe to him and carry him his books and papers, which I did, and the inventory, which he well approved of, that on the back side he acknowledged it contained all the goods of the Factory which he could well tell by his accompts. The coppie of the inventory corns i_nclosed, which you will find not taken presently, for we were forcied to stand on our guaird till the bussines was pretty well ended, yet in the mean time nothing was imbazeiled [= embezzled], as he himself accknowl.edgetb, but in the 1st night in presence of all the white men here I opened his chair [ = chest?] and weighed his gold, of which he sayes 2 mark is wanting, but his boy that keept his key is fleed, and I could not gett him again till the ships were gone. Mr Wortly according to his desire took aJl his things with him, and I understand Mr Wortly has left more [orders] with the French for me to deliver goods, if he has it will creat a great dale of trouble, but all I ever could gett sight of I gott. The King [blank] the Facto1y here and the concerns thereof are safe, and my industry shall not be wanting to keep them so. Here is no resisting the country, which was Mr Wortleys ruine, for he depending for Offrees sending him people so could never comply with them. The King sayes that if the white men correspond not with his enemies nor pinnyair his people non shall wrong them, but if they doe he is resolved to serve them the same trick. This country is exterordinaiie fearfull of Offrees comeing, which he will certainly do, for be has gott a great dale arnunition out of a Dutchman for the same purpose. Our King is very angry becaus Capt. Butteram stays at Popo, and yett will not lett me send to him but by sea, which requires so much time, it being again[st) wind and currant, yett I do intend to send to him that way, for I am afrayed he will not come down here, becaus he stays so long. Here is but 2 white men besides my self, and the French has eight, but most of our slaves can handle armes, so there is no fear of the French doeing us any harme. I suppose Capt. Butterams canoe will be goeing from hence in a little time, by them shall inlarge. 34 In the mean time shall be carefull of the Royall Companies concerns here. 1345. Edward Jacklin Whydah [ms. 'Whyadh'), 13 Oct. 1692 Yours of the first September last have received, and accordingly I acquainted the King that if he suffred us to be affronted by the French or any other, that your Worshipps would withdraw the Factory, upon which he seemed very much troubled, and promised me [I] should not be molested for the future. Capt. Butteram sailled from Little Po Po the 14 May last directly for Barbadoes, which made the King extream angry, he askt why we keept a Factory and our ships slaves at another place. The interlopers when here last told the King the Company was broack, & that no more Companys shipps would come upon the 1stCoast, which the King does believe. When I heard of Capt. Butteram comeing to Po Po, with what vendable goods was in the Factory I purchased 25 slaves for him, but he not comeing I was forced to keep them till ane oppertunity presented to dispose of them. I understand Capt. Butterarn carryed [away] a great many goods, the remains of his cargoe, which would have done very well here, and if the Commanders look no more upon the Factory then they have done its needlesse to keep it. July the 3darrived here the Pondare, Capt. Compree, a French ship of 36 guns.35 At Ashenee he took a small Dutch interloper, 36 and at Po Po he meet Capt. Bell & after 7 houers dispute took him, most of Bells men being ashore and took[= taken], but the French minding the plunder more then minding the ship lett her run ashore so soon as they had taken her, it being night.37 Several! of the Englishmen that were left aboard were drounded. He brought the Captain and 16 men here, 7 of which were put ashore, whom I was forced to intertain, or elce they might have been starved. Heres not been a ship here except the French ship since Mr Wortly went away, all staying at Po Po. Offree put tricks upon all of them, for when Capt. Bell came to anchor there he promis'd to slave him in 10 dayes, but after Offree had got some goods and white men ashoree he lay there 3 weeks without getting on[e] slave, if he had come down hee had been dispatched before the French came, and when Capt. Parish38 came he did the same with him, for after he had gotta sedane and some other things which Parish had brought for the King,39 he made him pay 30 slaves for the diet of some of Capt. Bells men, and Parish fearing he might do him more rnischeife went off with 100 slaves short of bis compliment. There was but a small quantity of goods left by Mr Wmtly, and no ship bas been here to make any advantage of it, and it is a great charge to maintain this Factory, here being nigh 50 slaves belonging to the house, and if 1 should dispose of any of them it might endeavour the [ms. 'there') running away of the rest, neither can they be well spared, for the rains has been here so extream that it has washed doun great part of the Factory, which wants tha[tJching very much, and it will require cost and time to repair it again. The 2 white men here have had no wages this 13 months, for which they are very troublesome. They say when they served Captain Whyburne they had their wages constantly paid them,40 but now they are in the Companys service they can have nothing, and here is no gold to pay them, nor goods neither excepting a few bowges, all the rest is worth nothing, most part of it being here when Whyburne was interlopeing, so I desire your Worships to take it into consideration, for it will be very hard to stay till the Companys ships come if they come not sooner then they us[ed] to do, besides here is no man will stay if they have not their wages, the two here having 32s per month each. Offrey is now upon his march towards Whydah, and what will be the esue [=issue] of it I can't tell. The King makes very little of it, but his dependancy is upon the Quamboars, to whom he has given a wast [ = vast] sum in agree[= aggrey], couecumber [= cowcumber]41 and corall, and Offrey has given them as much, so that they are divided one part for Offree and the other part for the King of Whydah, in a short time we shall see the conc lusion.42 The Dutch are up in the Kings town, and [we] are in a great dale of fear they do intend to build a Factory about half a mille from ours.43 Here is a report that Offree intends to destroy all the white men here, but that is raised by the King of Whydah, so that there is no fear of any such thing. The only goods in esteeme here is bougecs, [iron] barrs, corraU, long cloths, rangoes if good, pintadoes, pO]attilloes, red pcrpetuanoes or silks. If ships hath other there best way is to dispose of them for gold.44 Here they give two says or two boysadoes for a woman or 3 blue perpetuanocs, which is worth a great dale more to windward. If your Worshipps please to send doun a canoe with something, the same will serve to slave next shipp that comes, slaves being plenty enoug h here and likely to containow so. Lett how[= who] will gel the day,45 it will goe verry hard for us to stay 3 or 5 months longer. [PS] Jnclosed is an accompt from 1st Aprill to ultimo September 92. 1346. Edward Jackline Whydah, 25 Dec. 1692 This accompanies Monsieur Van-Vcchlei n,46 and is chcilly to acquaint your Worshipps of the affairs in these parts since my last, which was of 13 October by land. Olferry has been here and hath Iayed waste great part of this country, especially this place where our Factory stands.47 He lay here about 25 days, and [we] had much adoe to keep him from plundering the Factory, for the Quam boers and others that came to help him was very desireous to knook us all on the head and burne the Factory, to defend which I have been at great charge & trouble. About the latter end of November Offrey went to Offra and so up the country to gett people to help him,48 and now with new assistance has taken the country within a mille of the Kings town, so I believe it wiJInot be Jong ere be comes to us.49 His new allies are men eaters, 50 for which reasone all Europians are desireous to go off, but the King will suffer non but the Dutch to goe off,51 having pinyaird the French already, 52 and would me to if he could gett me, by which you may imagine what a condition we are in here. Sirs, I hope to gett away myself in a little time.53 [gap in correspondence, mid-Feb. to July 1693]54 1347. Francis Smith 55 Whydah Factory , 20 Sept. 1693 This comes by a Brandenburgh factor, who slaves one of their shipps of in 26 dayes, her complement being seaven hundred and thirty,56 and is to advise you that of the fourteenth instant wee arrived here, where wee finde this factory very much out of repaire, and like to have a great deal of trouble upon Mr Jacklins accompt, hee given [=giving ] sev[er]a ll of the Company house slaves free[dom], disposeing of others to the King, and takeing some with him. 57 As for the affaires of the country cannott at present give you a satisffactory accompt, havei ng not tyme to enquire in that affair no further then slaves, which are very plenty, and presume the shippe may be slaved of in a month or five weekes.58 The Captain would have slaved at Offeres,59 but could not git any, lying there four days without purchaseing a slave, wherein with referring you to my next is the needful! . 1348. Francis Smith Whydah Factory, 11 Dec. 1693 This accompanyes Bogue, Captain James Funnell[s] canoeman, which serves to acquaint your Worships that the ships Kendall and Katherine arrived here the 14th day of September and sailed from hence the 1gthday of October following with their full complement of slaves, excepting Capt. Curties, who wanted two, which was occasioned through mo1tality before the shipps departure. 60 Did receive from Capt. Funnill the following goods (vizt), being the remaines of his Negroe cargoe, 61 170 double chints, forty four single chints, two thousand eight hundred rango beads, hundred nynety one iron barrs, one silk longee, and one allejar, likewise from Capt. Edward Curtie[s], being the remaines of his Negro cargoe, three thousand one hundred & nynety rango beads, thirty fiv[e] caddey chints, six allijares, four hundred iron barrs and Lwo whole barrells powder, which have placed for the Royall African Companys credit. lnclosed is a eoppie of the inventory sent home to the Royall Company of wha t goods, stores &ca did finde in the Royall Companyes Factory at Whydah att my arrivall here. Since the ships depa rture have been dangerously ill of a distemper called the flux and gripes, which yet continues and makes me keepe my roome, and God knows when may find ease, our Doctor being deade, 62 can expect no remedy till it hath run its course. Likewise since my arriva ll John Smit h is deade, and Charles Wear ne dangerously sick, ill of the flux and gripes, and all of us haveing had a small seasoning to the country. Slaves arc very plenty in these parts, as doth appear by the quick dispatches of lhe aforesaid ships. PS. It's very hard to bee so farr from your parts and to have never [ms. 'new'] a Doctor , therefore take it into consideration and send us some body that understa nds chirurgery. 1349. Josiah Pearson Whydah Factory, 3 April 1694 This comes by a Brandenburgh Factor, who slaved off one of their shipps in one month, which tooke in six hundred slaves ,63 and is to advise your Worships of the death of Mr Fra ncis Smith, for a sma ll time after our ships depart ure the Kendall & Katherine he was taken very ill of the flux and gripes, which continued very violent upon him for the space of two months, and then it turned to a swalling [=swelling] in his belly and sometimes removeing on his side, which brought him to a very low and weake condition, he not being able to help himselfc before his death, which was the 8th day of February last about four a clock in the rnorning,64 but before his death a considerab le time l did by his order inventory the Royall African Companys FacLory here at Whydah, which inventory is now inclosed , he intending att that time to goe to Cape Coast Castle in Capt. Funnels canoe, but the wind proveing very contrary was forced to returne back againe. OJJery goeing to fight the Alampoe people, was unfortunat ly killed the 29th of December last,65 since which the Alampoes have burnt his crume, the Accras being all run to Great Arda.66 The Alampoes likewise did come down to help the King of Whydah to fight Great Popoe, but all to noe purpose, they being forced to returne back againe after they had beseidged Popoe upwards of a month, 67 all which time the whole army received their provision from the country, which has occasioned great scarcity of provision but more especially come. 1350. Josiah Pearson Whydah Factory, 22 April 1694 This accompanys Mr Anysworth, who slaved off one of [theirJ68 shipps in eighteen dayes, which took in five hundred & ninety slaves. I know nothing more as touching the affairs of the country than what I did satisfy your Worsltips in my last by the Brandenbrough, onely that slaves are very plenty in these parts. I understand by Mr Anysworth that Capt. Shirley and Capt. Phillips is to the windward with two great shipps bound for slaves, if they come down here they will not lye six weeks before they take in fifteen hundred Negroes, if they want so many, on condition their cargo is vendable. 69 Their cargoes ought to be two.thirds boogs, if be soe will not fail of a quick dispatch.70 1351. Josiah P[e]arson Widah Factory, 24 Nov. 1694 This comes by a Ducth [ = Dutch), a factor, who s.laved of their shipp in 24 days, which took in 6 hundred and odd slaves, and is to advise your Worships of the receipt of the deatd [ = dated] the 25th of Aprill 94 by the E[a)st India Merchant directed to Mr Smith likewise dated, with yours to my self the 27 of Aprill by the Hannibal, butt as to yours dated the 10 of Febmary which you mentioned sent by the Brandinbergh to advise of our shipps arrival [I) did not receive, neaither had I any notice of our ships being to windward till Mr Answorth came here, and then he could not or would not sati[s]ffie me weather they was really bound heather or not, soe that I did not make any provision for those ships, which fell owt very well, for those four slaves which I had by me the Commanders they would not take off my hands according to [their]71 charter parter [= party], which have advise the Company of, 72 so tha t I did not dispose of any to them, I be ing myselfe forced to give within a very small matter as much as they for tho se slaves which I do purchase, 73 for although slaves are very plenty in these parts it is best when ships are here, the shipps opening the way, but as soon as the ships are gone the ways are shutt up and nothing but warr, 74 so that I purchase of onJy some four slaves to dispose to ships that come hear for bugees to defray factory charges, for without bowges in these parts there is noe liveing for a whiteman. 75 I notice in yours that in exam[in]ing Mr Jack.leys last accompts with Mr Smith[s] inventorey you find a mistake in the slaves, which you say may be found out by comparing what Mr Srruth found when [omissio n]76 the inventory left by Capt. Bradshaw, 77 which inventorey I have not , but if your Worships please to perruse the following accompts [you) shall find what is become of those 3 men and 3 womem which is wanting, and the girl which is not mentioned in Mr Jacklins accompts, but as to the goods wanting of [those] which was left by Mr Jacklin [I) can give no satisfactory accompt, John Williams being gone to England in the ship Katherine, Capt. Edward Curtis Commander. By the next convenience, which will be by shipp s cannos, and that will be very sho1tly, shall give your worshipps accompt of how affairs stand in these parts. Likewise sha ll send my accompts, I being not very well at this instant. The remaine[s]  of Mr Persons  leved 78  m[en]  w[omen]  b[oys]  left by Mr Jacklin  23  20  4  carried off per Capt.  [4]79  6  Bradshaw  should remaine  19  14  4  m  WO  b  g[irls)  Mr Smith mak[e] found'  16  11  4  l  per inventory after which  inventory [I] gott 2 0 m WO b g so that will find my  16  13  4  1  which girle must be a  inventory to be  mistake in Jaclin, for  said girle [is one of the  Cornpanys slaves child  about 8 years oldJ80  after which  found which were owt  inventory have  of the Factory under  pretence of freedome  since which doe  was killed by the Mina  understand  people here about a  palaver Mr Jacklin  had about said people  since ctitto  dead  m  WO  b  ~  19  14  4  1  1352. Josiah Pearsons Whidah Factory, 8 April 1695 Tms accompanys our ships canoes, and serves to advise your Worships of the receipt of yours date the 24th January per Capt. Max Robinson , Commander of 30ththe Averilla, who arrived here the of ditto with an interlope r, Capt. Pen-y,81and sail'd from hence the 24th March following with 598 slaves, the enterloper sailing nine days before with 700 slaves, his chargoe much exceeding Capt. Robinson s both in quantity and quality, but however Capt. Robinson and I did endeavour to hinder him, or leastwise strive to sayle with him, going up to the King and useing all the arguements and perswations as possibly could be given, but found all to noe purpose, 82 he considering nothing but his present interest, neither has he any more kindness or respect for the Royall Company then enterlopers or any other nation, for doe find those that brings the most & best goods shall have the most & best slaves (as for example this enterloper). The cheifest reason that makes him and the Cabbosheers soe proud is because all ships comes here to Whidah, baveing had since the 14th February 1693/ 4 to this instant 13 ships which took of slaves, the road hardly being free twenty days together. I understand Capt. Zebbett 83 has slaved of Paccaheny, 84 he arriveing there 18thabout the 19th February and sail'd about the March following, for as I advised your Worships beforre of the death of Offerry and routall of his country, they have since rallied and are returned, and have conquered the Alampo people & took abondance of prisoners just before the arrivall of Capt. Zebbett, which presume has occasioned soe quick a dispatch. 85 But if the Accras can keep their country of Paccahenny, doe suppose that will be a good place to slave a single ship off some times, & per that meanes the King of Whidah will find thatt our ships can gett slaves in other parts, for now he perswades him self on the contrary. I doe hear a verry good caracter of Offery Bembeneen, the successo r of Offerry Pinccaniny, 86 that he is a fair trader and mightily ambitious of a correspondence with whitemen, but more expecially the Englis h, butt presume you will better be sattisfied per Capt. Zebbett, who have had the provall of him, who whithout doubt hath write you per his canoemen, which he has left at Paccahenny. 87 Comes with these a coppy of my accompts to primo December, which have sent home to the Royall African Company. [gap in correspondence, April 1696 to March 1697) 1353. Jos iah Pearson Whidah, 15 April 1697 In my last I advised you of my departure and delivery of the factory to Serjeant Clemett, since which by contrary winds I am returned to Whidah, and was once more wholly designed to try once more by way of canoa, having fitted my canoa in order thereunto, but in the mean time down comes a Dutch ship, with one Bosman a merchant, and hired the Mine blacks to seize Henry Clemett and the factory. His person they did [seize], as he was corning from town, and almost killed him.88 Now, he being very sick of his bru[i]ses wbich he received, and [l] not knowing but he may die, here being no body to secure the Royall Companyes fort and factory but a few old Companyes slaves, have taken the fort, slaves &c into my possession againe, not intending to come to the windward any more, since (I] have been so often crost [ = crossed], but to accept of tbe Royall Companyes proffer, humbly begging your worships confirmation, and [to] send by my canoa whom this accompaneys men, armes and a few goods with all speed, because [I] hear of two Dutch shipps more to windwa rd and bound hither, and their intention know not. Likewise this is to advise your Worships [of] the rogueryes of the Cabo Corso canoamen that comes hither, they combine with the blacks of the Mine against the factory and to steal the Commanders goods &c. Capt. Sallaways 89 canoaman by name Tom lent his canoa to the Mine blacks to goe to Jack.ing90 to take a Po1tuguze shipp, which they did and brought the shipp up hither. This Tom did take a canoaman from me which I had hired and paid in part to paddle me up to windward. Capt. Soanes 91 canoaman threw three caskes bouges into the sea, and gott them out afterwards in the night, one belonging to the Company, which you sent to me, the other[s) received by Henry Clemett. I hear they consulted with the Mine blacks to deliver me up at Popoe, as they formerly served Mr JackJin,92 they not knowing but I intended to goe along with them. These are not the only rogues which come hither, but all the Cabo Corso canoamen in generall, they valuing not the English nor the Companyes fort in these parts, but continually side with the Mine blacks, 93 but the way to make them be true is to send downe a Cabo Corso canoaman to Hve here and be head over them, allowing him a small maintenance, and to build a croome under the fort, which would be little or no charge, here being Companyes slaves enough. Serjeant Clemett desires your worships would be pleased to send him down his eigh[t] months pay and a half which is due to him the 9 instant, I not being able, haveing no goods to pay myself. PS. Discovering this plot made me dubious of my canoamen, but[= otherwise) would have given the Cabo Corso canoamen my canoa to carry up, leaving there own here, notwithstanding my canoa is worth two of theirs. [gap in correspondence, Sept. & Oct. 1697) 1354. Josiah Pearson , Whidah Factory, 25 April 1698 This is to advise you that at my arival at Whidah 94 found four shipps, since which are all sayled, and also to advise of a Dutch ship ariveing here, and that the Dutch Cheife has agreed with the king to settle a factory, in order whereunto hath laid out the ground.95 Capt. Devonport, being one of the four, sailed with four hundred and fifty slaves, also Capt. Holland with two hundred and twenty, having raised th.e prices, given [=giving] two slaves for one in powder, two hundred twenty fom pound per slave, thirty iron barrs and four hundred and fifty raogoe beads per slave.96 The great Portuguese which was at Cabo Corso sailed with two hundred slaves, and a French man with three hundred and fifty. Also Capt. Piles, now Commander of the Merchants Good Will,97 sailed with three hundred forty six slaves, Capt. Charles Cotterell with his pursor, second mate and gunner dyeing here. If any Companyes shipps should bring the afforementioned goods pray advise them to dispose of them to windward, and not only them, butt brandy, blue perpetuanoes, seyes, sheets, knives, pewter basons, nests of trunks, and corrall if not large and good red. Vendable goods at present is bouges, paper sletias, long cloaths, salampores, sletia lawns or any sort of fine linnen, neptunes, carrabines or light fuzes [= fusils], pintadoes and small beads. Francis Winnington is dead, and Thomas Hughes almost, that I am forced to keep Edward Lillingstone here against his will. I humbly begg that you would be pleased to send me eight or ten men, considering the mortality of this place. In my last gave you an accompt that I did not receive the chest offuzees, which by next hope you'l send with another. Also gave you an accompt of an error which supposed to be commited in the brass, being charged by invoice 25cwt 2qrs 25 lbs, and when opened here before wittness found it to contain 2cwt 2qrs 17 lbs and noe more.98 There is none of the goods I brought with me vends, exepting the bouges, pintadoes and sletia lawns. The beads proves to be of the wrong sort, being glass which is worth nothing. I thought they had been a small round white beade, with blue and green, but find to the contrary, exepting some few that are loose, which is a great disappoyntment. [gap in correspondence, Sept. to Dec. 1698] 1355. Josiah Pearson, Whidah Factory , I Jan. 1698/9 Since my last yours of the 24th of November by the Mary and Margaret GaJly,Capt. Samuell Kally [= Kelly] Comm ander, with two casks of bouges and 3cases of paper sletias, as also one hundred thirty one pounds of loose bougesaccording to invoice, have received on accomp t of the Roya JI AIIrican Com pany of England, but noe men, which I am heartily son-y for, but more particularly anAssistan t, which yom Worshipps can confide in and that shall be able to takecharge of the Royall Companys concerns in case of mortallity, the which personif you cannot supply me with, I desire that you should send me noc more goods,for now shall be obliged to live here continually, having noe second to deliver the Companys effects to in case my time was come to goe to England, whichhope now shall not be long. Captain Samue ll Kally acquainted me that hesupposes his cargoe will fall short, which if prove soe, intend to ship as manyslaves aboard him on the Royall Compa nys accompt as shall complet e his complyment, consigneing them to the Royal Comp anys agents at Jamaco e. Hehath now the major part of his slaves on board. Notwithstanding here are nowfour shipps more in the road besides himselfe, question not but to dispatch himvery speedily, for here want not slaves, onely very deare by reaso n of the vast nomber of shipps that resort to this plaice now.99 PS. J am in great streight [ = strait] for want of paper . 