XIV SHIPS A small number of the letters copied into the Cape Coast letter-books in the 1690s (75 of 1457) were received from ships operating along the coast, rather than from the RAC' s factories and agents onshore. Some of these were from vessels based locally at Cape Coast, engaged in coasting voyages. The majority, however, come from ships engaged in trans-Atlantic voyages, which originated in England and would continue to the Americas. 1 This distinction is not in practice clearcut, since some vessels after a period based in Africa were dis.patched on trans-Atlantic voyages (as with the Guinea Galley, the Swallow Brigantine and the Sally Rose in this period); and indeed, ships arriving from England often engaged in coasting trade, turning back up the coast lo 'windward [west)' after arrival at Cape Coast, before proceeding to the Americas. COASTING VOYAGES The ships based locally in West Africa were characteristically smaller craft, two of those in this period being 'sloops' and one a 'brigantine', while two others were 'gaJleys' .2 They were mainly employed to carry goods and stores among the RAC' s factories, but also did some trade, including on sections of the coast where the Company currently had no factories, for example to the west of the Gold Coast and in the 'Allampo ' country east of Accra. The Discovery, Commander Nicholas Pepperell, then Charles Salmon [The Discovery was in origin an interloping ship, which was captured by the RAC, appropriated & renamed in 1688, & initially commanded by Richard Bradshaw. 3 By l691, Bradshaw was back in England, & the ship was commanded by Pepperell.] 1356. Nicholas Pepperell From on board the shipp Di scovery in Accra roade, 6 July 1691 My last was 30th of June,4 which gave your Worshipps accompt of my comeing to Accra, for want of corne and water, and according to your Worshipps order have sent Mr Lang up in the canoe, and shall endeavour with all oppertunity to gett up to Cabo Corsoe. 5 I humbly desire your Worshipps to send three men in the liew of them which went home, without them we cannot weigh our anchors. Come is scarce and verry bad, if any good, I shall endeavor to purchase comeing up. [Pepperell proceeded up the coast, with difficulty, against the curren t (nos 1190-1). He later sailed west from Cape Coast, being reported off Sekondi on 9 Sept. & at Cape Apollonia about 7 Oct., but had come back east to Cape Three Points by 12 Nov. 1691 (nos 156, 160, 164).] 1357. Nicholas Pepperell & Thomas John son From on board the Discovery about a league to leward of Dickescove, 15 Nov. 1691 13thYours of the instant have received, & were then under saile a comeing downe to Succondee. Wee have by Mr Stephensons boy sent you on accompt of the Royall African Company of England four marks, four ounces, seaven angles & eight taccoes. 6 In our last dated the 9th October from Cape AppaJonia by a Portugueez vessell,7 gave you an accompt of our proceeding, meeting with several! shipps, the [ms. 'to'] which hath been a great hindrance to our trade. At our comeing downe wee were forced into Cape Tres Pointes for water, where our canoe comeing aboard with water oversett with Edward Pike the carpenter, who was then drownded. [PS] Just now came to anchor in Dickescove road a Dutch interloper who was with us att Assinee & Cape Appolonia, & spoiled our trade. 1358. Nicholas Pepperell & Thomas Johnson in Dickescove Road, 23 Nov. 1691 Yours of 21st instant have received, & your orders therein shall be punctually observed. With our last of the 15th instant, according to your order, we sent you on accompt of the Royall African Company of England, four marks four ounces seaven angles & eight taccoes, which you have not advised of the receipt. 1359. Nicholas Pepperell from Dickescove, 3 Dec. 1691 According to your orders I have lay as neare as possible I could to secure the towne,8 but finding foul ground I was forced to goe of againe, haveing done a great deale of damage to our cables, and where I lye now our gunns will not command the towne, but upon notice given mee will goe in again, tho' we receive a farther damage. I have made a proposall to them about putting two or three gunns with three white men ashoare under the flagg, provided that they would give me a pledge that I should have them off when I demanded them, for which I have not had an answer. No news of any ships to windward. [In Jan. 1692 Pepperell evacuated the RAC's personnel from Dixcove, landing them at Sekondi (no.171). In Feb. 1692 he was sent east, for corn, as follows.) 1360. Nicholas Pepperell Laggue, 15 Feb. 1691/2 I have been ashore att Laggue and Mumford, and at the toun about 2 milles to windward of Laggue ,9 and have endeavoured to gett come at your price but cannot. The enterloper corned here and paid 3 angles per chest, and they say they will have the same of me. I told them your prices, their answer to me before my comeing off was that I should have it at 2 angles per chest and not under, and that I shaH be supplyd with come. I thought it my duty to acquaint your worships. I understand I may buy some slaves here, their prices are for a man 2o and for a women 7 pease. Here Jyeth a small vessell tradeing belonging to the Branden burgs. 1361. Nicholas Pepperell Laggue, 17 Feb. 1691/2 Yours 16 instant came to my hands, and since have been ashore, and they have promised me that I shall have corne at 2a per chest. I am ready to receive it as soon as they bring the come aboard. [In early March 1692, he was at Anomabu, repairing leaks in his vessel & supplying corn to the ship Fauconberg (no.1385).] 1362. Nicholas Pepperell On Board the Di covet)', 30 March 1692 J have been at Laggue and Mumford and from thence above 14 rnilles up in the Atrong [= Acrong] country1¡ at the come cromes, and u ed all means p~ssible I could in purchaceing come but could not gett any. I believe come is very carce , by reasone Dommine hath gott about 10 chests in 19 dayes.11 I thought good to advice your Worsh ips by our canoe men. [In May 1692, the Discovery, now commanded by Charles Salmon , was sent to Accra , to deliver goods & collect shells (no.1206) .] 1363. [Charles Salmon] 12 from aboard the Discove ry, below Amuisa, 10 June 1692 This is to informe you that I sailld from Accra the I st of this month , and haveing a windward currant I gott up in 2 days a league to windward of Laggue , where the currant failled us, since which time by all the dilligence I can use I canot reach Amersa, therefor I thought it convenient to send my canoe with your letters to Aonimaboe . I have on board about 18 butts of oystershells, 13 and the vessel! is the same for l[e]akeing as she use to be. [In July 1692 the Discovery was at Ana ban, loading wood (no.513), but by Jan. 1693 it wa reported to have 'fallen into pieces', so was presumably scrapped. 14] The Alligator Sloop, Commander Leonard Jeffrye [The Alligator Sloop was already in West Africa in 1687-8, conunande<l initiaJly by Nicholas Pepperell, then by Leonard Jeffrye (vol.ii, nos 892-7). Between May 1691-March 1692, still (or again) commanded by Jeffryes, it made severaJ voyages to Accra, to deliver goods & collect shells (nos 1183-4, 1190, 1192-3, 1195, 1197-8, 1200-1, 1204), & also west to Sekondi, to collect gold from the RAC factory (no.160) & to Anomabu, for corn (no.621). In April 1692, Jeffryes went again to Accra, to deliver goods & collect shells (no.1205).) 1364. Leonard .Jeffrys [Accra], 3 May 1692 The cause of my writting is to acquaint you that comeing down to Accra I mett with very bad weather that torr [=tore] my main saill almost to pieces, and the 2 pieces of hessing [ = hessian] 15 that I had at Cape Co[a]st I have spent to mend it, but that is not enough, but I am loaden. I would venture up if wind present, but here is strong leward currants, that I cannot gett up. In case you please to send one piece hessing more, I think to make the saill good again, and if I be come away it is but liveing [= leaving] it at Morree. [In Sept-Oct. J692 he made voyages to the west, delivering building materials to Sekondi (nos 195, 199) & goods to Dixcove (no.5). He was again at Dixcove in early Nov. 1692, & was delayed there by necessary repairs to his vessel (nos 9-10).J 1365. Leonard Jeffryes Ditckies Cove, 20 Nov. 1692 These are to acquaint your Worshipps I have as yett done nothing to the sloope but shall with all possibility proceed in the dispatching of her, I haveing been at Cape Trees Pointas and the General 16 hath spared aboute 21 pounds of pitch, he presents his service to you. The smith here is about work of makeing sheeving naills, which when they are made shall goe down to Succondee and do what I have occasion for there, which will not be long adoei ng, and then I shall with all speed come down. I have not provision, and non here to be gott for money, so hopeing these will satisfy your Worshipps. [.Jeffryes was still at Dixcove 23 Nov. 1692 (no.12), but returned to Cape Coast soon after. Between Dec. 1692-Feb. 1693, he made voyages to Egya for corn (nos 937-9), to Amisa, for shells (nos 687-9), & to Dixcove, to deliver stores & collect wood (no.25). By this time, the sloop was in poor condition , expected to fall to pieces, as the Discovery had,17 & it was probably also decommissioned. Jeffryes later made 2 or more visits to Winneba, between Aug. 1693-March 1694, but it does not appear that he was still commanding the Alligator (nos 1065 etc.).] Tbe Swallow Brigantine (1st tour of service), Commander Richard Bradshaw, then Nicholas Pepperell [Bradshaw was sent in the Swallow to Cape Coa tin 1692, with instruc.tions to remain there at the dispo al of the Chief Merchants, & to return to England witbin 2 years; as reported in 1694, he was 'chiefly employed to carry stores and merchandize &c., to the other factories on the coast' .18 He arrived at Dixcove on 7 Feb. 1693, en route to Cape Coast (no.24). During the hiatus in the correspondence between Feb.-July 1693 he made a voyage to Whydah (no.1351). During Aug.-Nov. 1693 he made 3 separate voyages east, to deliver goods & supplies to Winneba & Accra (nos 1066-8, 1078, 1221), & to collect oystershells from Amisa (nos 700-1, 1221). He was back at Amisa for shells in late Dec. 1693 (nos 714-15).] 1366. Richard Bradshaw Amersa , 29 D c. 1693 I have forboare with great patience, and wish I could have continued it longer, till I came myselfe to Cabo Corso Castle , but the insolency of some of our men ha oe p rplexed mee with denying the ships worke that I have suffered more abu e with these raskalls then ever I did since I wa borne, and except there bee ome course taken with them, I cannott think myselfe secure nor the vessell safe. This morning J being in the whole[ = hold] aworking and [there] proving little winde, [I] ordered the slack of the cable to bee hailed in, and before I came upon deck found the ship had drove very neare the shore. I being much urprized, being affraide wee could not carry it off, orders our men immediately to hawle up the boate. Some of them makeing but slow hast, and eing this Frenchman sitt on the hipps gunnell, 19 I asked him why hee did not make ha t and tep in the boate. I seeing hee did not care to stirr, I told him , if he did not make more hast, I would give him a slap on the face, and in that occasion of time it would have urged any man, but hee replyed if I struck him hee would strike mee againe, upon which, a shovell being by mee, I hot [ = hit] him a blow or two with the flatt side of it, which if I had not defended my eJfe, [he] would have gave mee as much or more. Soe bee told mee bee would goe ashore, and I promised hee should when hee pleased, soe have lett him goe in my canoa to Agga. This Frenchman is one of the rascalls that reffused to carry the bricks ashore at Wynnebah till Mr Buckeridge had drassed [= dres ed] him .20 I hope, Gentlemen, you will bee pleased to make an example of him, that others may take wameing. Hee has 50s per month, and will justify it. Hee is not the 3d part of a sailer, but great lauber [= lubber), 21 and one that is continually grumbling with anything that is to bee done. If I had but 3 or 4 slave s on board [they) would doe the Company more service then some white men I have aboard, soe will not insist any more till I come to Cabo Corsoe, onely shall trouble you with a line or two , which is this, one 5 hand canoe s is broake soe much that I have not wherewith to refitt her, and the other soe leaky [ms. 'Jealy' ] that she can hardly swym. The weather now is good, and! if I had but canoes should bee soon dispatched. [PS] I have but sixteen butts aboard as yett. 1367. Richard Bradshaw Amersa, 30 Dec. 1693 I have just now received on board the 5 hand canoe , and shall take all the care po ssible of her. Tomorrow they will not worke, however if the weather holds faire I hope in a short tyme to be laden. Staples and nailes wee shall dayly want, therefore the sooner they are sent the better. Let the sizes bee 10 or 12d nailes. [In Jan. 1694, he went to Dixcove, to deliver goods, returning to Cape Coast 27 Feb. (nos 37-9).) 1368. Richard Bradshaw Cabo Corso Road, 12 March 1693/4 I hope you will excuse my being soe trobJesome, for if necessity did not force me, or that I could any wayes make a shift without a supply, should think my selfe very negligent to put the Royal Company to any unnecessary charge. In the [ms. 'qr'] first place at Dickies Cove , in that hard turnadoe , my best bower cable22 was rubed soe much & drove into fouJe ground that [I] was forced to cutt off 12 foot, soe now 2 tornadoe s in Cabo Corso Road, which strained him twice, the first time cutt off 5 fathoms and the second time I. fathoms. I have only now my short cable to trust to, which I now ride by, the weather being soe uncertaine , and the strength of the wind now in turnadoes comes generally at 10,23 which is right on the shoar, that if anything should give way the vessel! is in danger of being lost. Capt. Shirley 24 as I am informed has three cables to dispose off of 7 and 7. inch, which may serve [to] use for a small bower. l have alsoe but one foretopsayle on board, and my maynestay sayle is soe short that it gives our shipp no way, which I can impute only to the sayle makers fault. Canvace [=canvas] I have none aboard but Hollands duck,25 that is not fitt for our use, therefore, Gentlemen, desire you will be pleased to spare me one of the old sailes which is in your Castle to repaire ours. [In March 1694 he sailed again to Winneba & Accra, to deliver goods & supplies (nos 1083, 1236), & in April again to Accra, for shells (nos 1237-8).) 1369. Richard Bradshaw Annamaboe, 23 April 1694 This morning about 9 of the clock I arrived in Annamaboe Road, & came from Accra on Saturday at IO in the morning. I have on board forty five butts of oyster shells. Desire to know whether I may take any here att Emersa [ = Amersa], if not shall make the best of my way for Caboe Corsoe. [He was expected to go back to Amisa for shells in mid-May 1694 (no.727); & later in May delivered goods to Winneba (no.1084).] 1370. Richard Bradshaw Wynnebah, 26 May 1694 I am ashamed to be soe troublesome to you with these continuall complaints, where I have found noe other remedy but patience, and have bore it soe much that it's not in my power to containe there abuses any longer, where I find civillity w.i!I not availe anything nor make my life happy amongst them.26 I hope, Gentlemen, you will consider that except you beare me out in my commands as a master ought to be, and not heare the mens complaints before mine, I shall neither be able to serve the Company nor keep the vessell as it ought to bee. There is severall things daily gone to ruine, for they care not what they spoile or what they lose, and if a man tells them they begin to curse & sweare, & then they are for going ashore, and there is never a time I have carried bricks but still wee have these differences, which I am sure if they were aboard of any shipp that comes on the Coast, they would doe more worke in a weeks time than they doe here in a quarter of a yeare. I have now left one of our Dutchmen ashore at Wynnebah for abuseing of me & denying goeing aboard, and telling me he did not come to be a slave to carry bricks ashore, which I bid him tell that att Cabo Corso, and he swore sacraments that he could doe as well as I. In fine the canoe was split the second day in peices, that I see there was noe other remedy but my boat. rtould them they should make but one turne a day, and that in the morning, by reason the weather was soe uncertaine, and I know if I should be putt to any straite, my boat being absent, I could neither gett my anchor up nor saile our vessell, and withaJI said if any of them had any bossiness they might goe ashore in my canoe. As this follow which abused me had been two or three days drinking with some men belonging to an interloper, never minde to doe the ships worke, soe one day they keept our boat ashore from morning till evening, and this Brawke being ashore, I asked him why he did not goe aboard, but put me to this trouble to come ashore for them, upon which he said they staid for William Crisp, who was setting the bricklayers leg that was out of joint. I bad them goe downe to the boate, and I would goe & call him, but found him drunck, and by much perswations gott him downe to the boate. I had noe sooner turned about but spied this Dutchman Brawk, I think with a stick in his hand, then I could not gett him to goe on board. Not perceiveing him in drink, told him he should goe on board, and pushed him to goe, upon which he comes driving at me with a short truncheon, that if I had not catched severall of his blows on my left anne I beLieve he would [have] cun me to the scull. From my elboe to my wrist he did sufficiently maule me, and I did endeavour to doe the same with him with my cane, but a man had as good beat upon a block as his skin. I am sure my arme was in that condition that I could hardly hold it to my head the next day, as our cooke can testifie, who helped me to dress it when I came on board. This is not the first, second nor third time he has abused me, once at Accra, where Mr Bloome put him in irons for 3 or 4 dayes together. 27 To tell the truth he is not a fellow fitt to be on board of a small ship, for he makes the same disturbances with the rest of the men, has 50s per month, and in the night one may as well make a poast [= post] stirr as himself, for I never knew him keep a watch as he should doe since his being on board. I could insist a great deale more but I think it is not worthwhile. He has since, as I understand, threatened my life, nay he told me to my face if I had struck him he would kill me, and the other day when our boate was ashore with bricks be borrowed the Frenchmans knife of him, it may be for the same intent, for the other Dutchman said in my boys hearing that that his consort valued me not one pinn if he had but a good knife, soe I did not come upon him in the night. Nay, these two consorts at Cabo Corso tooke the boate ashore unknown to me, and the Frenchman to fight, and as soon as the one drawed his knife the other (which is the fellow who struck me) gott up a great stone and letts drive att his head, almost beat his braines out, which marke he carried for severall weeks afterwards. Gentlemen, I hope you will excuse me if I have wrought anything amiss, for to tell the truth I sleep in fear and live a most disatisfied life, more than ever did since I was borne, with this crew I have on board.28 PS. Tomorrow dcsigne, God willing, to saile, and must be forced to goe forAgga, for we can gett noe come here for myselfe nor men. lln July 1694, Bradshaw sailed to Amisa (no.738), for shells.] 1371. Richard Bradshaw Amersa, 16 July 1694 I have lainc here att Amersa these eight dayes, and have nott as yett any shellsputt on board of me, by reason the seas runing so high. I am unprovided bothwith staples & nailes if any of the canoes should chance to be splitt, thereforedesire, Gentlemen, you will please to order the smith to make some for us, fordoubtless wee shall have occasion for both.29 l wish I could made a quickerdispatch up, but such uncertaine weather I never knew since my being on theCoast. The Mine briganteen has been worse putt to it than us, for after she hadgott as farr as Barracue was forced to goc to Accra againe for wood & water. [A few days later, he delivered shells to Anomabu, & returned to Arnisa 26July, for a second loading (no.739, 741).] 1372. Richard Bradshaw Amersa. 28 July 1694 I have nothing but continuall troubles to acquaint you with, and till you takesome speedy course to prevent farther dangers I know not but this rught theydesigne to murther me and runne away with the Companyes vessell, for 3 ofthern are gone ashore betimes this morning without my leave or any provoca.tion, and tell me betimes tomon-ow they wi11be aboard againe with more hands,soe I suppose for noe good designc. I have none aboard but the cooke and mywhite boy, Marcus being ashore takeing accompt of the shells, besides a fewslaves. I have been soe horrably abused amongst them all that I am almost out ofmy witts. I desire, Gentlemen, you will be pleased to send this night two or threehonest fellows aboard me, that may secure the vessell. 1373. Richard Bradshaw Amersa, 28 July 1694 For fear my former should not come to your hand I have wrott to the same formeper this, which I send by land, that three of our men this morning are goneashore without my leave, and to prevenl further dangers, which I know not butthis night they designe to murther me and runn away with the Companys vessell,I have none aboard but my self, cooke & boy, besides some few slaves, andthey tell me betimes in the morning they will be with me againe with more men, I suppose for noe good designe. I desire that two or three men may be sent downe with all speed, to secure the Companys vessell. 1374. Richard Bradshaw Ame rsa, 28 July 1694 I received yours about 11 a clock this night, with the three white men, for which I retume you all many thanks, and shall follow your advice according to order if possible, and will rather take abuse than give any, soe that I can but live quiett amongst them, and as for putting any ashore it was not with my consent, for I told them that went this day if the vessell came to any damage it should be upon their perrill , for I had gave them noe cause in the least, but only a maggot tooke in their heads. I wish, Gentlemen , you knew but the real! truth how they have used me, and what falce lyes they have reported against me every place where they come, which has made me gaine one ill name undeserved, and till some of them be severely punished to make an examp le for the rest it wi 11 never be otherwise, however will endeavour to make it the best. The weat her is now pretty good, and hope shall have a quick dispatch, which I shall further as much as I can, to gett up to Cabo Corso. [In early Sept. 1694, Bradshaw again sailed east, to Egya & Winneba (nos 966, 1092). He reached Accra 8 Sept., but died 2 days later, & Nicholas Pepperell was sent to take over command of the Swallow (nos 1250-1). Pepperell went east of Accra to collect slaves, returned to Accra, & sailed from there for Cape Coast 20 Oct. 1694 (nos 1252, 1255). He then took the Swallow from West Africa with a cargo of slaves to Barbados, 30 talcing in com & wood at Anashan in Nov. 1694 (no.572). From Barbados, he went to England, news of his arrival there being reported to Africa in Dec. 1695 (no.97). In 1696, he returned to West Africa (see no.1380). The Guinea Galley, Commande r William Piles [Piles in the Guinea Galley was sent to West Africa in 1694, with instructions to serve there & return within 2 years? his arrival was reported in Aug. 1694 (no.1248). Thereafter he is regularly reported plying among the RAC' s factories, from Dixcove in the west to Accra in the east, carrying com, oystershells & other building materials, as well as trade goods & slaves. But only this single letter from him is reco rded .] 1375. William Piles From on board the Guinney Galley, lyeing in Mina Roade, 15 April 1695 This is to certifye you that I have binn and paid my respects to the Generall , and he tells me that I shall have all the assistance imaginable, 32 and he would have me send downe to you for a man that can specke Dutch and bring him along with me when I have occasion for any thing, that he may understand me. Sirs, here hath been the master of the small ship aboard of that ship to windward, and he does wear English collors, and he will not acquaint him weather he be an interlooper or noe, but told the master he know he was a Dutch man & I am an English man, and so bid him begone about his bussiness. She is an English ship. He knows not how many guns he have nor men, but they have sent welcome after him.33 Sirs, if you could but spare me four gallons rum, for I have none to give my people, and I would desire you for to Jett me have a gallon of brandy and I will pay what price you please. [At the end of 1695, Piles was scheduled to take the Guinea Galley back to England (no.362), but it did not arrive there, being reported 'taken', i.e. by the French (no.97). ln 1696/7 Piles commanded a different ship in a voyage back to Africa, as follows.) The Sally Rose, Commander William Piles [Piles in the Sally Rose was sent to Africa in 1696, again with instructions to remain there up to 2 years.34 On aniva l at Cape Coast in Jan. 1697, he was sent to Sao Tome in pursuit of the Hannibal , which had been taken over by a mutiny of its crew (no.1417, with n.132). After return to Cape Coast, in April 1697 he was sent to Accra, to collect slaves & shells (no.1303); he then went back up to Cape Coast, & on to Komenda, to deliver goods (nos 390-1), & via Dixcove to Cape Three Points, to cut timber, as follows.) 1376. William Piles Cape Tres Pointas , 14 May 1697 This is to certifie you that I received your letter the 13 of this instant, and Capt. Pepperell arrived the 12 of the said instant ,35 whereof you write for Mr Gabb to ret11rnein this canoa, 36 but wee must have some body else to come and give them directions how to cutt it, for they have felled six trees of about fifty feet long and about two feet through when they are squared, and wee cannot gett them out of the woods without more help, and have but one cross hand saw and the two axes that came from Cape Coast, for they must be sawed in boards, or else there is no bringing them off, for they will sink like iron. The weather proves so bad that wee are not able to work, and believe by that time I gett my water and wood on board it will be near June, and shall strive to gett two sides offifty feet long, and two for a ladder, and fifty peices for hand spikes . My deck is but a spare deck, and canno t venture too great a waite [ = weight] upon itt. Mr Vincent spared us six slaves,37 but gave the slaves no corne with them, that they doe make a sad complainte for victualls. The come that I delivered at Dick.ies Cove proves about sixteen chests to short, according to their measure. 38 Here is a great deale of flower to be had, it is very good, it came over in the last shipp that arrived here, but they ask eight angles a hundred weight, I desire to know whether yoUJr Worships would be pleased to have any. My men make a sad comp lainte that they should doe other shipps work, for they have enough of their own. 1377. William Piles Cape Tres Pointas, 25 May 1697 I seeing a shipp about evening lye off of Axim, I made bold to send my mate aboard to see from whence he came, and finding her to be a Dutch interloper that came out of England about two months agoe, but he wou Id hardly speak to my mate, my mate enquiring of him whether he meet with any shipps to windward, he told my mate that he saw an English shipp the 23 and 24 day, it being a pretty grate shipp, and two Portuguze of at Ash[i]nee, and he believes the En glishman may be at Cape Tres Pointas within this two days. I have all my water and wood, but now trying to gett the timber that J have sawed out fo r you downe, which I find it a great deale of .trouble. Capt. Pepperell has but 12 butts full as yett, and belive it will be the latter end of July if he has not more help to assist him, for here is no canoa nor men to be had, and I am sorry that I must stay here for him, for I find I must take all that is here for the Castle in. [In June 1697 he sailed east, collecting goods from Winneba (no.1148), to trade on the coast east of Accra.] 1378. William Piles Tersee, 39 22 June 1697 I make bold to trouble you with a few Jines concerning my bouges. Without I am alowed more, I shall bring them upp again, for as soone as I gave them seaventy pound for a man, they imediately fell a telling40 them, and return'd them back again. I have offered them eighty pound for a man, and they will not take them.41 I have had about twenty women slaves along side this day, and would nott buy them because they had noe men. I desire your answer how many pound of bouges you will allow me for a man, and likewise for a woman. The Alampoes have been alt warr to Jeward, and I beleive in a weeks time I shall have them back with their slaves.42 1379. WiJliam Piles From Pono,43 30 June 1697 I received your letter this same instant, whereof you write me word to give as I think fitt. They not now ask for any [i.e. bouges], for they sell them now one amongst another for a thousand [per] la. 44 I have not sold one peice of chint, nor one Guinea stuff, for they tell me they can buy Guinea stuffs in the Castle for 1 .a and pintadoes at 4Y2a and blue bafts at 3a, whereof I have disposed of none as yett, nor no iron batrs, nor silk longees, nor sletia lawnes. I am forced to keepe my sheets and perpetuanoes and basons for men when they present. I have made shift to dispose of all my boysadoes but two, and my sayes is disposed off but six, but forced to take women for them. I have now 25 men, 31 women, 5 boyes, 2 girles, which is sixty three slaves in all. I expect some slaves from Quambo, 45 for perpetuanoes which I have preserved by me. I have refused about thirty women because there is no men, but I shall not lett a man pass, if he be anything good. I was up at the kings towne,46 and he telJs me I shall have slaves very suddenly, but I see no likelyhood of itt. I beleive I may lye a month longer before I shall have sixty more slaves, and doe wish I had some two pound basons, and more carpetts. My sayes fall one short in the number, and are very much moatheaten , and my boysadoes is likewise. [In July 1697, Piles was still east of Accra, buying slaves (no.1309); but returned to Accra in mid-Aug., collecting further slaves, en route to Cape Coast (nos 1314-15). In early Dec. he went to Anomabu, then back to Cape Coast (nos 883-4). Later in Dec. 1697 he was despatched on a trans.Atlantic voyage (see no.1425). The Swallow (2nd tour) , Commander Nicholas Pepperell [As noted above, Pepperell had taken the Swallow, after a period based in Africa, to Eng land via the West Indies in 1694/5. In 1696, he returned to Africa, again with instructions to remain there for up to 2 years.47 In Aug..Sept. 1686 he made 2 visits to Dixcove (nos 112, 1152). In April 1697 he again went west from Cape Coast, delivering shells & bricks to Kornenda (no.386), & aniving at Cape Three Points 12 May 1697, to join Wi!Liam Piles in the Sally Rose, to cut timber (nos 393, 1376-7).] 1380. Nicholas Pepperell Cape Tres Pointas , 2 June 1697 I have been very tedious about our wood & water, the weather being very bad and great seas, and being weakely maned. Captain Piles hath left a good part of his timber behind for me to take in, which I cannot doe for want of ropes to bring it of. I hope the next week to fill all our water and gett wood for the use of the vessell. I would willingly take in the timber that is here, which I cannot doe without you will be pleased to send me ropes. Our boat will hard ly swim, I being fore' d to putt her on shore every time to land our men. Our cabbells [=cab les] are very bad and break every time wee weigh. Sirs, expecting your orders about the timber. [In July he went east to Dixcove, & thence on down the coast (no.116). Later in 1697, he was again dispatched on a trans-Atlantic voyage;48 in early Aug. he was _at Accra, collecting goods, & intending for Whydah (nos 1312-13) .] The Cabo Corso Galley, Commander Thomas White, then William Hippsly [The Cabo Corso Galley is recorded from Aug. 1697, plying among the RAC's factories, from Dixcove to Accra, 49 commanded by Thomas White (no. I 157). In early Nov. 1697 White was at Amisa, collecting shells (no.879), & came from there to Anomabu, where he wrote the single letter which is recorded.] 1381. Thomas White Charles Fort, Annamaboe, 9 Nov. 1697 I humbly crave the favour of your Worshipps as to send me sombody to bleed me, being violent ill of a feavour , and let him bring some medicines with him. (In May I 698 White was removed from command of the Galley (cf. no.1430); it was later commanded by Wirnarn Hippsly (no.137).] Unnamed sloop, Commander John Wilson, then George Harvey [An unnamed sloop is recorded from July 1697, plying among the RAC factories on the coast. This had been purchased locaHy, from Capt. Louren90 de Souza Rego of Sao Tome, & by early 1698 was commanded by John Wilson.50 In May 1698 Wilson made a voyage to Komenda (nos 428-30), & on to Sekondi, where the RAC was building a fort, which he reached 21 May 1698 (no.260), & from where he wrote the single letter recorded from him.] 1382. John Wi llson Succoodee, 22 May 1698 I stoped at Commenda, and could not gett the rope that I spoke for to carene with, butt shall doe the best I can. I want some piks and a piece of cable that I was speaking off to make a maine stay, for mine is parted, eleaven fathoms will doe. The gunns are all up and not mounted as yett.5 1 Two days more I hope to have all the shells ashore. The Gally sailed from this a Sunday morning about one a clock,52 but not out of sight, she proves leaky. The canoe men are gone affter him. This place, at itt there is a great swell, but hope that time I am ready to find it otherwayes. [In 1699, command of the sloop passed to George Harvey (no.1064).] TRANS-ATLANTIC VOYAGES The ships engaged in trans-Atlantic voyages which corresponded with Cape Coast were mostly the RAC' s own ships, or in one case (the Merchant 's Good 