1381. Thomas Whit Charles Fort , Annamaboe, 9 Nov. 1697 I humbly crave the favour of your Wor hipps as to send me sombody Lo bleed me, being violent ill of a feavour, and let him bring some medicine with him. [In May 1698 White was removed from command of the Galley (cf. no.1430); it was later commanded by William Hippsly (no.137).) Unnamed sloop, Commander John Wilson, then George Harvey [An unnamed loop is recorded from July 1697, plying among the RAC factories on the coa t. This had been purcha ed locally, from Capt. Lourern;o de Souza Rego of Sao Tome, & by early J698 was commanded by John Wilson. 50 In May 1698 Wil on made a voyage to Komenda (nos 428-30) , & on to Sekondi , where the RAC was building a fort, which her ached 21 May 1698 (no.260) , & from where he wrote the single letter recorded from him.] 1382. John Willson Succondee, 22 May 1698 1 toped at Comrnenda, and could not gett the rope that I spoke for to carene with, butt shall doe the be t I can. I want some piks and a piece of cable that I wa speaking off to make a maine stay, for mine is parted, eleaven fathoms will doe . The gunns are all up and not mounted as yett.51 Two day more I hope to have all the shell a hore. The Gally sailed from this a Sunday morning about one a clock ,52 but not out of ight, he proves leaky. The canoe men are gone affter him. Thi place, at itt there is a great swell, but hope that time I am ready to find it otherwayes. [ln 1699, command of the loop passed to George Harvey (no.1064).] TRANS-ATLANTIC VOYAGES The ships engaged in trans-Atlantic voyages which corresponded with Cape Coast were mostly the RAC 's own ships, or in one case (the Merchant's Good Will io 1698) operating under licence from the Company, but at least one was an interloper, the Adventure 'in 1695. Also includedl here are letters from two retiring agents of the RAC, Thomas Stephenson in 1692 and William Melross in 1697, who took their passage home on Danish ships. The Supply, Commander James Lashley 53 [The Supply was in origin a captured French ship, appropriated by the RAC & placed under Lashley's command in 1690.54 Jn May 1691 he went to Sekondi, to deliver goods 1691 (no.149), but in Aug. 1691 was dispatched on a trans-Atlantic voyage, calling at Anomabu (no.608) & Accra (nos 1193--4), & arriving at Whydah 17 Aug. 1691 (no.1342).] 1383. James Lashley Whydah Road, 6 Sept. 1691 These are to informe your Worships I haveing purchased my complyment of slaves and having not goods sufficient to defray my charges was forcied to intreat Mr John Worthley to give me credite for the following goods, being 32 pieces pautkies. 55 I shall saill toomorrow in company with Capt. Sherely and Capt. Edwards, 56 not doubting by Gods assistance to make a good voyage. [On arrival in Barbados , the Supply was judged 'crazy' & sold off.57] (1stThe Fauconberg voyage), Commander Francis Buttram 58 1384. Francis Buttram From on board the Royal African Company ship the Fauconborgb, 14 Jan. 1691/2 These are to acquaint you that I am now goeing in to Dickiescove, and hope verry suddaintly to wait upon you at Cabo Corsoe Castle. I should be verry glad to hear from you, and to know the price of severall sorts of goods. 1385. Francis Butteram On board the Fauconborgh, Annimaboe Road, 7 March 1691/2 According to your order will make all the dispatch I can to take the come out of MT Pepperell,59 and will assiste him what I can in stoping his leaks. I have gott on board as much wood as I have occasione for and all the come but what Mr Gregory has bought since last Wedensay.60 Slaves are not so plenty as I expected, if you think convenient we may do as well in Cabo Corso Road as here. 1386. Francis Butteram From Paokahnee, 61 Ship Fauconburgh, 14 May 1692 Wee have[ing] ane oppe1tunity this day of a moderat currant have made use of it, although wee cannot sume up our compliment of slaves, as you will find by the bill of ladeing. Come we have gott but very little since we parted from you. The next day after we came here I sent to Whydah by my matte Pilles but had [ms. 'heard'] no answer in writting, but heard that Mr Wortly was pynard by the French but with the Kings order,62 and we had news of 4 ships [i.e. at Whydah], which caused me not to hasten down there, and our incouragment by Offree here being very great,63 for he told he would dispatch us in a week or 10 dayes, and I believe in a forthnight had been dispatched had we had good weather. Also we hear Mr Wortly is sent a prisoner on board Capt. Bruar64 by the Kings order, and Offree does say he will give him battle in a short time for it. The canoe men has been very earnest for their pay, but I have left [only] 74 cowreis,65 which I profred them, but they were for all that was due to them or non, so I have paid them nothing. They have done there duty, and gone to Whydah with the two canoes. [Buttram sailed from Little Popo 14 May 1692, for Barbados (no.1345). He returned with the Fauconberg on a 2nd voyage to Africa in 1694-5 (see nos 1398-9).] Thomas Stephenson [Stephenson was former chief of the RAC 's fort at Sekondi (see chap.II), now returning to England.] 1387. Thomas Stephenson Cabo Corsoe Castle, 16 Aug. 1692 My time being expired according to my agreement with the RoyaJI Affrican Company of England, and hopes that all my accompts with the said Company are right, and I finding myself indisposed in body, do humbly request your Worships to grant me the liberty to go home along with the Dains [=Danes] ship now ridding at Accra and now bound for Europe,66 and in so doeing you will for ever oblidge [me]. 1388. Thomas Stephenson James Fort, Accra, 30 Aug. 1692 This accompanies the retume of the canoe, and retumes you my most humble and hearty thanks for this last and all other kindnessese received. The Companys pauckell Thave delivered to Mr Fensman, who goeth home along with this ship and doth intend to saill.67 I have agreed to goe with him, paying one mark for my passage and 5a per mark .68 Soe wishing you all health and prospe rity, with an opperlunity whereby I may be able to serve you. 1389. Thomas Stephenson [Accra], n.d. [7 Sept. 1692] Havein g this opportu nity thought my self oblidged to present my humble service to you once more before I go, which will be toornorrow as Monsieur Fensman doth informe me,69 and what letters you have sent me shall be carefully delivered, soe wishing you all health and prosperity is the hearty desire of him who shaIJ alwayes seek oppcrtuoities to serve you. The Kendal, Commander James Funnell 70 [The Kendal had made a voyage to Africa in 1691, comma nded by John Edwards (nos 598, 661, l 187, 1342), but no coITespondence is registered from this earlier voyage. In 1693, commanded by Funnell , she aITived in Africa during the hiatus in the correspondence between Feb.-July 1693.] 1390. Francis Smith 71 James Fort, Accra, 6 Sept. 1693 This comes only but to advise you that this day the Captain designe to saile to leward, but am not certaine that they will goe to Whydah. Mr Bloome hears that slaves are plenty there, which is good encourageme nt for them to goe there directly, & [I] dont doubt but that it may prove much to the Royall Companys inter[est], as also a great encouragement to the Kinge and people, which with the tender of my respects and thanks for all the favo urs received from you all. 1391. James Funnell from on board the Kendall Frigatt in Accra Road, 7 Sept. 1693 I am heartily sorry that I have no other wayes to retabate the many favours I have received from you, but only my bare humble and hearty thanks, assureing you, if you please to lay any comman ds upon me in any thinge can serve you, shall be more ready to serve then you will be to comman d me. Thank be God we are all well on bord, and designed to saile this evening from this place. I tooke in at Anamaboe 520 chests of come,72 and I do find we have ratber more provision for Negroes then had last voyage, which is the reason have not taken the remainder of the 600 chests. I have given a receipt according to your order. I have rece ived of Mr Bloome 22 slaves, and have paid him out of the Whydah cargoe, as doubtle ss he will give you an accompt ,73 and have bought severall besides. I shall by [ms. 'buy') my canoe, when I have done, give you an accompt of my future proceedings. I can here of no more but one French man on th.e Coast, and he is gone down long since to Whydah, 74 so hope to meet with no molestation. Sirs, looking over my accompts last night I missed a case of sayes, and do find by my boatswaines accompt that it was put ashore at Cape Coast through a mistake, you haveing one case more then your complement, which humbly desire to dispose of it, if possible. It came ashore with other goods mentioned on the other side, it is no.324, which will see by the invoyce of my Windward cargoe, not belonging to the Castle cargoe.75 I am very glad you have it because I could not dispose of it myselfe, but as for the rest of my Windward cargoe it is almost all gone. As for news I have little at present. If you have any conveyance before you here further from me pray lett me begg of you to advise Mr Cradock 76 that we are all weJI so farr, and that I shall endeavour to gett of the Coast as soon as possible. I have little else at present to trouble you with, only desireing you to except of my humble thanks for the favours I received from you. [Funnell called first at Little Popo, but was unable to get slaves there, so went on to Whydah, where he arrived 14 Sept., & departed 18 Oct. 1693 (nos 1347-8). The Kendal returned to Africa in 1695/6 (no.1404), under a different captain, 77 but no coITespondence is preserved from this later voyage.] The East India Merchant, Commander Thomas Shirley, then George Clay78 [Shirley commanded the East India Merchant on a voyage to Africa in 1691 (nos 661, 1188, 1342), but no correspondence survives from this voyage. He again left England in Oct. 1693, this time in company with the Hannibal, commander Thomas Phillips, & other ships (no.1395), but the vessels were separated by bad weather, & Shirley arrived at Cape Mesurado alone, as follows .] 1392. Thomas Shirley From on board the East lndea Merchant, riding at Cape Mountsarrado, 29 Dec. 1693 Haveing this opportunity thought it convenient to acquaint you with my arrivall here on the 16th of this instant, at which tyme came to a great disaster by a clapp of thunder and lightning which splitt my foremast and foretopp mast, but have cutt two more and hope in few dayes to finish them, and then shall not fail to make hast the best of way downe, haveing a large supply of goods, provisions, and passengers on board. I would have sent downe the letters and packett, but am not certaine whether these might come safe to your hands or not, being an interloper. 79 [He was joined at Cape Mesw-ado by Phillips in the Hannibal on 23 Dec. 1693 (no.1395), & the two ships sailed east together.] 1393. Thomas Shirley The East India Merchant, [Brandenburg Fort], 16 Feb. 1693/4 Just now received yours of the 26th ultimo, and accordingly by the bearer have sent the Company packett, and what private letters I have. As for trade have not mett with any the whole Coast along, and I have on board 3000£ windward cargoe and cannot dispose of any,80 soe shall make the best of my way downe. [Shirley 's passage down the coast, in company with the Hannibal, is noted in this correspondence at Sekondi (no.241), Cape Coast (no.1368), & Anomabu & Egya, where they took in corn (nos 729, 958), arriving at Accra 12 May 1694.] 1394. George Clay Accra, 20 May 169481 These are to acquaint you of the death of Capt. Thomas Shirley who deceased the 12th instant. 82 lnclosed have sent the accompt cunent of goods sold to the day he died, and for the rest of the remain es fear shall not dispose of any, trade being very dull in these parts. The raines has been a great hinderance to our getting of[f] the come, but shall make the best dispatch can for Whydah, and shall not faile to use my uttmost endeavours to gett our slaves as soon as possible. [Having taken in corn at Accra (no.1240), the two ships proceeded to Whydah (no.1351).) The Hannibal, Commander Thomas Phillips 83 [Phillips himself wrote an extended accoun.t of this voyage, publish ed in 1732, which is frequently cited in the annotation to this volume.] 1395. Thomas Phillips From on board the Haooiball at Cape Mountsenado, 5 Jan. 1693/4 This comes to kiss your hands, and to advise you that the ship Haru1iball whereof I am Commander, now in the service of the Royall African Company, is safely arrived at Montserrado the 23d past, in one month and twentie seaven dayes from England, whence sailed in company of the East India Marchant, Capt. Shirley, the Mediterranean, Capt. Daniel, the Jeffery, Capt. Joanes [ = Soanes], Capt. Perry and Capt. Hereford,84 all in the African Companys service. Wee were all separated by bad weather, and the first I mett againe was Capt. Shirley in this place, refitting his foremast, whjch was carried away with a thunder bolt.85 Hee has almost done and expect in two or three dayes to sett sail.e for the Coast.86 Haveing an opportunity by a Barbadoes interloper, one Mr Gubbins Commander,87 who sailed hence before us, and may probably bee with you before us, I have thought it convenient to advise you that wee have agreed with the Company to receive from you seaven hundred Negroes, but in case you could not supply us with that number, if you could in any competent tyme supply mee with 550 Negroes, my owners88 have agreed to bee satisfied with 550 and to proceed directly for Barbadoes, rather then to goe down to Whidah or Ardah to compleat the number of seaven hundred. Wee had when wee sett saile from England thirty three souldiers for your Castle, but it was our misfortune of off the Island Tenereefe, 89 to meete with a French man of warr of betweene forty and fifty gunns, whome wee engaged six houres, at which tyme hee was pleased to leave us. In the fight three of your souldiers and two of my seamen were killed outright, and I had aboute 20 men wounded. Hee has shattered our mast and rigging very much, but am very glad 'tis so well, and that wee have been able to defend our own and the Companys interest against him.90 [From Cape Mesurado, Phjllips sailed down the coast with the East India Merchant, arriving at Gross-Friedrichsburg 15 Feb. 1694.) 1396. Thomas Phillips Off the Brandenburgh Fort, from on board the Hanniball, 16 Feb. 1693/4 I have the favor of yours of the 26th past, wherein you give mee but little encomagement to hope for my complyment of slaves at your Castle,91 and less of any probability of a good trade for my Windward cargoe, which amounts to £3070-9s-7d of which as yet have not disposed of above £100,92 tho doe really beleive noe ships endeavored it more, by keepeing close to the shoare and stopping at all places where wee could imagine any trade, but they have noe gold, the Dutch interlopers (of which wee saw 4)93 having pickt up that little they had. I hope wee shall meet with a better trade between this and your Castle. [PS] I have delivered the bearer your packet, together with what other letters I had for your Caslle. [His passage down the coast is noted .in this correspondence at Sekondi (no.241), Anomabu & Egya, where he took in com (nos 725, 729, 958), Winneba (nos 1084-5), Accra, where he took in more corn (no.J 240), & Whydah (no.135 1), where he arrived 20 May 1694.) 1397. [Thomas Phillips] from on board of the Hannibball, St Thomas, 25Aug. 1694 I can slip noe occasion withowt send you my heartiy respects. This comes by the hands of Capt. Lonome [= Lo1Tence], who has bin very civill and needful to me hear,94 and designes in a fortenights times for the Coast. He and I have verry often wished your healthe in a good cup of punch, which is the onely dtink we can gitt hear. I left a letter for you att Whidah with Mr Person adviseing the needful, which hope ere this you have recevied. 95 I sailed with the E[a]st India Marchant from Whidue [= Whidah] July the 271\ haveing bought our complement of Negroes, and I anived hear the 11th of August, & the Est India Merchant arrived 4 days after me. This day with the help of God I do intend to set saile to Barbadoes without said shipp, she being not able to gett ready this 5 or 6 dayes. I have lost in all every way 56 negroes. I question not but God send m[e] well to Barbadoes to deliver 600 negroes, have had maney sike [= sick] of the smallpox butt [only] four dead of itt, the flux is the ruening [= ruining] distemper.96 I have had a feavour , a toach [ = touch] of a fevour and ague hear, but thank God its over. [PS] Please to advise the necessaries to England per first occasion that offers. [Phillips completed his voyage to Barbados, & thence back to England, his shjp's arrival there being reported to Africa in Dec. 1695 (no.97). The Hannibal returned to Africa under a different captain, William Hill, in 1697 (nos 1417, 1425), but no correspondence survi_ves from that voyage.] The Fauconberg (2nd voyage), Commander Francis Buttrarn 97 1398. Francis Buttram Tabbo, 98 12 Aug. 1694 I put in here to wood & water. Wee are all very well, and intend to be with you with what speed wee can, only touch at some particular places as wee come along. I hope I shall find a quick dispatch for slaves, which is very much desired by the Royall African Company. J have a great many letters for several! persons, but thought it not convenient to send them by Capt. Piles.99 I have 22 passengers on board, vizt 2 doctors, a writer, a serjeant & 18 souldiers. [Later in Aug. Buttram called at Dixcove on his way to Cape Coast (no.53). In Sept. 1694 his mate visited Anasban, to collect corn & wood (no.566). This final letter seems to have been written off or near Cape Coast.) 1399. Francis Buttram Fauconberg, 3 Oct, 1694 Pray be pleased to Lett the bearer have 4 blew perpetuanoes, being on accompt of slaves bought on board. 100 [Buttram' s arrival in England was reported to Africa in Dec. 1695 (no.97). The Fauconb erg returned to Africa in 1696, under a different captain, Abraham Brown (nos 1404-15).) The John Bonadventure, Commander John Zebbett 101 1400. John Zebbett Dicl<.ies Cove, 9 Jan. 1694 [= 1695) These are to signifie my arrivall att this place. This night designe to sayle to Taggeradoe, and tomorrow I will send downe my long boote with the Companys souldiers and letters. I desier cons[ider] the favour, if itt suiets [=suits] with your convenience, to send me line or two how trade governs and sell sorts [sic], that I may not doe noe prejudise in underselling the markett. [Zebbett sailed east from Cape Coast in Feb. 1695, & was expected to call at Anashan (no.580), & Accra (nos 1267-8), though it is not clear if he in fact visited either place. He took in slaves at Little Popo , arriving there about 19 Feb. & departing about 18 March 1695 (no.1352).] The Averil/a, Commander Max Robinson 102 [Robinson took in corn at Anomabu & Egya, Jan. 1695 (no.781), called at Accra (no.1267) , arrived at Whydah 30 Jan., & left 24 March 1695 (no.1352).) 1401. Max Robin son St Thoma, 14 April 1695 These come s per Captain Lawrenco [i.e. de Souza], who designes suddenly for you[r] parts. I presume before this may come to hand, you may hear from Mr Parsons, who will write to you of my procedings there. 103 When came from thence was so sick did not think should have Lived hither, but (praysd the Lord) am now verry well recovered. It was my ill fortune a little before gott to Whidah, to meet with the English interloper bound to the same place.104 He also slaved there, he haveing a much more sortable 105 cargoe, and almost as much again. They took little notice of me, so that I was hard put to it to gett my slaves. I brought of 598, have since lost about 20, the rest are pretty well, am in hopes shall not loose many more. I design, God willing, from hence tomorrow. Have bin but here four days. Shall add no more but harthy thanks for all your favours, wishing you all the happi ness your harts can desire. PS. Capt. Lawrenco has bin extrordinary civiU to me, but his countrymen are great rogues in nature. [The Averilla reached Barbados in June 1695, but was taken by French privateers on its passage from there to England.106] The Adventure, Commander Samuel Shering 107 [Shering was an interloper (nos 74, 1288), who was at Dixcove, headed down the coast, in April 1695, when he became involved with the RAC's factors there.] 1402. Samuell Shering On board the Adventure, 2 May 1695 I make bold [to] trouble you with these lines to acquaint you of the great insensibility of your servant Mr Pinck, who told me that he being Cheif of the Royall African Companys Fmt at Dickies Cove, did most impudently send on board my ship your factor Mr Jordan without my knowledge, alt[h]ough he being in so lamentable a condition with his flux & his most loathsome sores, yet the man was welcome to me as in his condition being a man to my opinjon not for thjs world, and for me to be so inhumane as I may say Mr Pinck was, to turn him onto the sea in a canoe in such weather and in such condition, which I would not [have] sent the worst of my slaves, I do thinck it not a Christians part. Sirs, this is the very truth. 108 Memorandum of what Mr Jordan deceased left on board the Adventure 1 old gownd & jacket , i shirts, l pair of b1itches, 1 trunck, 2 pair old shoes, I old hat, I sword brasshaft with silver twist, 1 flock bead [=bed) and pillow, 2 small barrells of 109Portuguize soop (= soap), about 12 lb sugar, I mild[= milled] half crowne. To my knowledge this is all of Mr Jordan goods &ca. I am your humble servant here in possestion of Mr Jordans goods. [In Sept. J695 Shering was at Accra, where he suffered an insurrection of the slaves on board his ship, prior to his departure (no.1288).] The Thomas & Elizabeth, Commander Benjamin Rawlings110 [Rawlings had been in Africa, in a sloop from Barbados, in 1692 (no.661), but no correspondence from this voyage is recorded. The Thomas & Elizabeth in 1695 was apparently not an RAC ship, but it is not clear whether it was an interloper, or held a licence from the Company. On the coast, however, Rawlings cooperated with the RAC's local agents.] 1403. Benjamin Rawlings from on board the Thomas & Elizabeth, in Annamaboe Road, 29 Sept. 1695 After my humble service, these are to informe you that I doe expect to be going of the Coast in 8 or IOdayes after the date hereof , so that if you have any service to command to Barbadoes or Jamaica, where I am bound, I shall be ready to oblidge you as far as in me lies. In the mean time, when I am certain what day I shall saile, I will give you two days notice. [He left Anomabu 9 Oct. 1695, taking the RAC mail packet (nos 831-2). He was again in Africa in 1698 (no.126), but again, no correspondence from this voyage is recorded.) The Fauconberg (3rd voyage), Commander Abraham Brown 111 1404. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg, [Dixcove] 30 Jan. 1695/6 The 18th instant wee made Cape Mountsarado , and have had no trade along the Coast, which have bin the occassion of our so suddaine arrivall at Dickies Cove, when thought fitt to advise you thereof , that if our stay to windward of Cabo Corso be needfull you may lett us know, with the prices of your goods, soe soon as possible, my intention being to come down so soon as possible, unless you order the contrary. I have 2 factors, 2 writers, a chyrurgeon, trades .men and solders on board, and more are in the Kendall friggott, which wee left at Portsmouth the 16th of last instant, also Capt. Seamer [=Soanes] & Kelley att Gravesend, whom if not arrived may soon expect. 112 I hope Capt. Pepperell in the Swallow is with you by this time, from whom you have the latest news.113 [After arrival at Cape Coast, Brown was sent back west to Komenda, to support the English fort there, which was under blockade from African forces allied to the Dutch, arriving 10 Feb. 1696 (no.371).] 1405. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg, [Komenda], 12 Feb. 1695/6 Tuesday about one a clock [ms. 'colck'] in the afternoon wee came to anchor in five fathom of Coromenda, the Castle bearing N. by W. The Dutch Galley passed by us a Monday about two a clock in the afternoon & came to anchor before us off Commenda, and lies nearer the shoar then wee dare goe. As soon as wee came to anchor wee sent the canoes ashoar, with Doctor Jackson &ca, but were forced back again by the Mine canoes, which are in number about 40 or 50. 114 This morning I man' d the pinnace with white men to goe ashoar, but the said canoes stoped them, and searched the pinnaes for powder and provisions, and the admirall black with the Dutch ftagg told them that neither whites nor blacks, provisions nor powder should goe ashoar, and obliged them to returne to the shipp, that unless you sent a sufficient number of canoes from Cabo Corso to force their way through it is impossible for us to relieve the Castle, which wee fear is in great want. There are a great number of blacks which wee can easily see walking ashoar between the English and Dutch [forts]. There hath not been a canoe been aboard of us since wee have been here to give us any information, neither will any of those canoes you sent with us venture ashoar. I desire your speedy letter what to doe in this matter, and whether the fight be deferred.115 1406. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg, [Komenda], 18 Feb. 1695/6 I received two letters from you on Sunday morning & one this morning. I would have advised you of our proceedings before this, but could gett noe canoe to come. The same night I wrote to you last wee had a canoe of from our Castle, in which I sent ashoar halfe a barrell of powder, some match, bread & beefe, 116 & since T putt ashoar some rumm, cheese & come , but could not putt a white man ashoar, the blacks with their canoes guarding the waterside and not suffering any canoe or boat to goe to or from the shoar, that finding weecould not doe nothing but by force, on Saturday last wee man'd our long boat& pinnace with pattereroes and small armes and endeavoured to goe ashoar, 117 but were repulsed by the said blacks, who fired severall shou al our boats beforewee returned any, but fireing our patlereroes mad[e] them bear off. Howeverbeing many in number and continually fireing, wee had a hot skirmish, and wereforced to fire from the ship to preserve our boats. Wee lost not a man in theaction, only one wounded. Wee had a canoe came of from the Castle yesterday,which gave as an accompt that they are all well in the Castle, and have receivedseverall provisions from the King of Aguaffo. [Brown now presumably returned LoCape Coast, where the following 5letters appear to have been written.] 1407. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconbcrg, 20 Feb. 1695/6 I shall observe your orders and send the remaining goods ashoar with allexpedition. The long boat is now ashoar for water, else would have loaded herwith goods for you. 1408. Abraham Browne Ship Pauconberg, 21 Feb. 1695/6 Pray be pleased to send by this bearer sixteen ounces of gold, being to purchase slaves. 1409. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg, 24 Feb. 1695/6 Pray be pleased to deliver to the bearer eight carpctts if you sell them at 2a each,& some boysadoes if sell them at I4a. 1410. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg, 24 Feb. 1695/6 Pray be pleased to deliver to the bearer one cask of tallow. 1411. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg, 26 Feb. 1695/6 Pray be pleased to deliver to the bearer ten caske of the same tallow wee broughtwith us. [In March 1696, he proceeded to Anomabu, and on to Winneba, as follows.] 1412. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg, [Winneba], 13 March 1695/6 Yours received of the 7th instant, & shall observe your orders & take the Mine canoe men aboard. 118 Wee left Annamaboe the 9th instant, haveing delivered what goods wee had for that factory, & received from thence 240 chests corn.119 The 10th wee came to anchor in Winneba road, and have indeavoured all possible to gett wood. Mr Cooper 120 is forced to send 8 or 9 miles into the countrey for some wood for X peices and staincient s [=stanchions] for plattforms, which this afternoon wee shall be supplied with whatever have occasion for, till wee come up againe, and intend God willing for Accra tomorrow morning. PS. This morning I have received 0111board the 30 Mine canoe men, and am now just under saile for Accra. [He proceeded to Accra, to deliver goods & collect slaves (nos 1301-2), then went back to Winneba , where he collected more slaves (nos 1144-5), & on to Anomabu, for com & slave s (no.860)]. 1413. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg, [Anomabu], 26 March 1696 Yours I received, and according to your advice have sent away the two Portuguzes ships lying by us, & wee have on board two hundred & twenty slaves (including the 30 Mine canoemen). I know not what the warrs may produce,121 finding little encouragement to leward. Tomorrow hope to receive the remainder of come on board, and then shall make the best of my way for Cabo Corso. PS. Pray be so kind to gett what yams you can. [In the following 2 letters, he seems to be back at Cape Coast.] 1414. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg, 30 March 1696 Pray be pleased to deliver to the bearer sixteen cask of tallow. 1415. Abraham Browne Ship Fauconberg , 31 March 1696 Pray be pleased to send by the bearer twenty four casks tallow, one baile blew Welch plaines. [Brown completed his voyage during the hiatus in the Rawlin son correspondence from April 1696. The Fauconberg returned to Africa in 1697 under a different captain, John Luke (see nos 1418-24) .] The Success, Commander John Soanes, then William Churchey 122 [Soanes had commanded the Jeffery on a voyage to Africa in 1693/4 (no.1395), but no correspondence is recorded from this earlier voyage. For this voyage in the Success, he was reported to be at Gravesend, ready to depart for Africa, in Dec. 1695 (no.1404); but his departure was delayed, & his arriva l in Africa fell during the h.iatus in the correspondence between April 1696-March 1697. He was at Whydah in early 1697 (no.1353).J 1416. William Churchy On board Sucess rideing at Principis, 123 22 March 1696/7 Haveing soe convenient an oppertunity of giveing you this line, by which grati.tude ob liges me to return thanks for the civill entertainment which found when presen t at yours, and having the news of our Commanders death, whom departed this life on the second instant. Then were in our way hither from Whidah, since have mett with a tedious voyage. Hope to be gone hence on the next on our way. Gentlemen , as to the care am obliged to you for the intere st of the Royall Company, I hope shall discharge it to satisfaction. Wee are indiferently in health [as] for our Negroes, but many of our company are downe, however doubt not but shall by the refreshment that have hear soon recover againe. I shall reque st a favour of you, which is that when oppertunity offers of sending to England for to give a line or two of to Jeffry Jeffry s Esquire, 124 am certaine will be made knowne to all whome are concerned, 125 for soe doeing shall owne myself further obliged to [you]. WilLiam Melross [Melross was a retiring member of the Council of Chief Merchants at Cape Coast Castle , returning to England, on an unnamed Danish ship. 126] 1417. William Melro ss St Thoma, 21 May 1697 I doubt not but you received my Jetter from Accra, 127 from whence we took our departure the 19t h past, and after our endeavours to gett of the Coast directly for Europe where foi-ced to putt in here, which happned the 13th instant, Providence so ordering it that for want of watter we should not perish in the watter. Notwithstanding the Captain had more from Mr Searle then he first required, 128 wee soon found all was not sufficient for the voyage, considering the shipps dull sailing, and the cask he had, great part of them being wooden bound, proved not good, soe that on our arrivall here found as many leaked out as wee dranck all of us in this short passage (1 mean sho1t to what the voyage must be). [We) have in some measure suffered, but the poor seamen have most sencibley felt the smart, have ing dranck at allowance 129 from our parting with the land till our arrival here. Pray God wee have seen the worst. Enough of this muddy watter, which I only incert for your caution. Wee are now makeing what provision wee can, haveing emptied the beef and pork to ftll the cask with watter. Capt. William Hill, 130 being sick the most part of the voyage, departed this life about 2 or 3 houres after we anchored here, makeing no will, whose corps next night was buried on shore in the woods, with a great deal of trouble and as much decency as the place and time would afford us (not being suffered to lay him near the Christian Pagans here), whose concerns, which is considerable, I have taken care to secure for the widdow, being inventoryed by the Capta in, Merchant, his boy Thomas Nicho lls and my self, Capt. Towres 131 and Capt. Lawrence De So[u)za present , his money sealed up with 3 seales, vizt Captains, Merchants and his owne. His cloths he had left (haveing disposed of most at Cape Coast) are sold on board, esteeming it most profitable for the widdow, the produce of which shall be sealed up when gathered in, all which with his pappers if delivered me by the Captain shall faithfully be delivered her, God sending my arri vall in safty to London. The inclosed letters will advise you of the Hanniballs appearing and anchoring off this place 5 or 6 days after Capt. Pyles departure, 132 and what happned dureing her stay here, to which I refená you. 133 Next day after the interment of Capt Hill I went to the head Govemours of a people who I thinkrather governs them, or at least little regards them, from whom I demandedMr Finch, allso [= alias?) White, named in the inclosed, to be delivered me inorder to be sent to Cape Coast, who was ooe of the head actors of the tragedy,being for that purpose delivered them by Capt. Perry, 134 but l found they wereunwilling, and after waiting 3 days their possitivc answer was they should keephim till their new Governor arrived from Lisboa, who is expected dayly, herebeing a shipp in the road with whom he came in company, and to him [ms.'thim') they will deliver him to be disposed of at his pleasure. rnthe mean timeif he can make his escape he will, or rather they will send him off, he being aprisone r at large, and when well (being now sick) went about with his sword,cane and wigg like a Cavallier. By this you may judge what accompt the RoyallCompany would have had from them had it been their fortune to bave taken theshipp. For my part I belcve had not the ship William been in the road, they hadbought her whole cargoe, the pyratt offering for much less than cost in England, as some of themselves told me, vizt iron barrs two per a and perpetuanoes at 2 or3 angles apiece, and not unlikely they had some of it. I had the liberty to see anddiscourse the rogue White, who would confess nothing of their takeing anyvessell on the Coast. All he had to say, which is little more than is contained inthe other declareation, he hath sent me in his declareation under his hand, coppywhereof goes incloscd, to which referr. 135 I would have protested against theseven heads (after I found that neither fair words nor threatning would bringthem to an allowance), but being discharged the Companys service did not thinkit proper. This is intended you by Capt. Lawrence d[e] Souza, who thinks to bewith you in two months, by whome if you receive not said White you may act asyou think convenient. I must acknowledge Capt. Lawrences civilyty dureing mystay here, though I had enough of the country the first day, for I see no differencebetween it and the Coast, and I think the people worse, considering they arcChristians and know or ought to know better than a great many of them acts.l hope my brother Wallter is arrived in England or near it, by whome the Companywillhave an accomptof all that is past here. Capt. Warner and Capt. Salaway havebeen both here, but no news of Capt. Soanz, who presume whent to Cape Lopez,136and I pray God the Hanniball did not meett with him. Our Captain thinks to saile,God willing, tomorrow. God grant prosperous gales, and crowne the end of this(I fear tedious) voyage with a safe arrival at our desired port, where I wish us allahappy meeting in due time. Inthe interim with hearty prayers for your healths andprosperitys, and my respects to all my freinds on [ms. 'one') the Coast in generall. PS. Capt. Towres gives his service to you, to send forward the inclosed to Mr Sear lc.137 The rouge White pretends to be a Roman Catholick, for which he hath this favour shown him. Capt. d Souza will deliver you coppyes of all letters past between Capt. Perry and Darley and allso Webber while here in the road. 138 The Fauconberg (4th voyage), Commander John Lukc139 [The first 6 of these letters seem to have been written off Cape Coast Castle.] Ship Fauconbergh , 29 May 16971418. John Luke I have now on board one factor and six soldiers for the Castle. I intend to come on shore soe soone as the shipp is safe at an anchor, and bring what letters I have on board with me. Ship Fauconbergh , 31 May 16971419. John Luke I have sent by the great canoa twenty barrells powder. Shipp Fauconberg , 4 June 16971420. John Luke The gunn which we fired was a gunn that was betwixt decks, and not haveing occasion to make use of him, upon cleareing abaft, and removeing him into the gunn roome, found the tomkin to be drove halfe in,140 which obliged us to fire him off to clear him. 1421. John Luke Ship Fauconberge , 16 June 1697 The Portuguez Captains are now on board, and desire gold for the slaves wee had from them, and some other slaves are now brought aboard, for whome the persons thatt brought them will have gold also, therefore pray thatt would send me three marks gold by bearer. 1422. John Luke Shipp Fauconberge, 1 July 1697 Pray be pleased to send by bearer twenty cases spiritts. [In Aug. 1697, Luke set out west, for Komenda, as follows.] 1423. John Luke Ship Fauconberg, 13 Aug. 1697 Wee have had very bad success hitherto in our Commenda voyage, wee haveing allready lost two anchors, that wee are forced to make use of our best bower, which is a great fateigue to our men, and if wee should lose that it will goe very hard with us, haveing noe other but our sheett anchor. Pray Jett me have your directions what I shall doe in this matter. 1424. John Luke Ship Fauconberg, [Komenda], 16 Aug. 1697 Here is little wind and the currant setts stron[g] against us. John Cabess desired me to send him four very good two hand canoes this evening, and he will goe from the ship and keep a good offing and goe ashore at Comenda in the morning. 141 Wee designe to stay here with the ship till tomorrow noon, that there may be no suspition. Pray favour me with your advise in the matter. [PS] John Cabess craves your secreasy [= secrecy], and that the canoemen may know nothing of the matter till they come on board. [The rest of this voyage occurred during the hiatus in the correspondence in Sept.-Oct. 1697. Luke returned to West Africa with the Fauconberg in 1698/9 (nos .I 040, 1060, 1178), but no correspondence from this later voyage is recorded.) The Sally Rose, Commander William Piles 142 [Piles in the Sally Rose had been employed locally in West Africa during 1697 (nos 1376-9). On 14 Dec. 1697 he was at Cape Coast, due to sail for England (no.1026).] 1425. William Piles St Thoma, 30 Dec. 1697 I make bold to sattisfie you that tbe 27th instant I fell in with the lewardmost part of St Thoma, and have lost five slaves, but hope shall not loose no more in my passage. I have about two thousand yamms left, but was forced to goe in by reason the worme has damaged my butts, and doe find some halfe and others a fourth part out, which I must see to mend them. I doe designe to buy some other provitions for the refreshment of my slaves. My shipp continues the same with her leaks, and doe expect in three days to saile from St Thoma. I have spoke to the Governour about John White, the ringleader of the roagues belonging to the Hanniball, but he will not lett me have him by any means. 143 They are the greates t roagucs that l have mett with since I have been upon the Coast, and if it be my fortune to meet with any of their shipps upon the Coast I will have sattisfactio n from them. So having noe more to enlarge, but desireing to be remembe red to all my friends. The Merchants Good Will, Commander Charles Cotterrell, then Thomas Piles 144 [The Merchants Goodwill was a 'perrnissione d ship' (no.121), i.e. one not belonging to the RAC, but holding a licence to trade from the Company.] 1426. Charles Cotterrell From on board the Merchants Good Will, now rideing at Dickes Cove, 28 Jan. 1698 I have sent your letters by the bearer, and desire your assistance in helpeing me to what slaves you can, having a very good cargoe aboard to ruspose on, and if you please to have any of your iron left at any of your factoryes to windward pray Len me know by a canoe, and Tshall be verry willing to serve you, and as soone as I have got my wood and water aboard, I shall make the best of my way downe I can. 145 1427. Charles Cottcrrell From on board the Merchants Goodwill, now rideing at Accra, 25 Feb. 1697/8 I thought fitt to give you a sma11accompt of an accident that has happened aboard since our departure from Cabo Corso Castle which is as followeth. On the 19th instant in the morning wee were off of Morea. Being calme, I went downe with my purser to Annamaboc, to gett the come ready, that I might make what ruspatch I could, and when the shipp came downe, I understood that Mr Pilcs 146 and the boatswaine bad tooke a canoe and nett from two fisher men, in exchange for the boatswaines hat which he lost at Cabo Corso. The fisher men jumped over board, and what became of them I cannot tell. The canoe and the nett is still detained, andthe boatswai.ne sayes his wages must make sattisfaction if any thing is am iss. I am very sorry that things should goe as they doe, for it is much against my inclynation.[ desire that you would accommidate the business and you will oblidge [me]. [At Accra, Cotterell delivered goods to Joseph Pearson, chief of theWhydah factory, who was visiting there (no.1325), & proceeded toWhydah, presumably carrying Pearson. He died at Whydah, & wassucceeded in command by his mate Thomas Piles, who departed in Marchor April 1698 (no.1354).] The Prince of Orange, Commander Josiah Daniel 147 [Daniel was reported at Cestos, 7 July 1698 (no.134)] 1428. Josiah Daniell Cabo Corso Road, 27 July 1698 I received yours of yesterdays, and would glad ly wait on you, if could be any wayes serviceable, notwithstanding I am not very well. The Commander of theinterloper doth but endeavour to excuse himselfe on the accompt of my letters.I sent to enquire when he sayled, and he said in two or three dayes, soc I told him I would give him the trouble of a letter when he sayled, and according ly assoone as he loosed his foretopsaile this morning J sent my letters on board offhim. I have noe other business with him. I will wait on you as soone as possible.Am willing to see our shipp shifted. 148 1429. Josiah Daniell Prince Orrange, Cabo Corso Road, 10 Aug. 1698 The sea nmning soc high prevents me comeing on shore to dispatch our business with you. I hope shall have a fair opportu.nity to wait on you ere long, till thenshall be impatient. I desire in the mean time you will get my certificates &caready, and be pleased to send me word what you please to have in lieu of thebouges, and for what slaves you arc pleased to put on board, that I may gett it tohand, and pray discourse the canoe men if they gett any Cabboshee rs to engagefor their performance, and if you please to agree with them, and advise me what I must given em in hand, they demand halfe in hand in money. 149 I will wait onyou as soonc as I dare venture on shore. 1430. Josiah Daniell Prince Orrange, Cabo Corso Road, 16 Aug. 1698 This instant came on board Mr Thomas White, and produced a certificate from under your hands that he was discharged from the Royall Companys service, 150 likewise a letter that he was shipped on board Capt. Carters sloope, 151 as mate in the roome of him that was lately killed, and remembering you cautioned me not to part with him , I detaine him until! your further orders . 1431. Josiah Daniell Prince Orrange [Anomabu], 21 Aug. 1698 I received your letter of the 20th in the evening. I shall be very glad to purchase our complement of slaves without goeing to Whidah. 152 1 designe to wait on you this day either by land or water. I should have come sooner but 3 or four of our unruly fellows attempted to runn away, but was prevented by the Blacks in the towne and are secured in the Castle . 1432. Josiah Daniell Prince Orrange, [Anomabu] 22 Aug. 1698 With my humble service, this is to acquaint you of my safe arivall on board last night, and this morning am on shore at Annamaboe , and desine to saile afternoon for Tantumquerry if have a breake of wind. I have sent up by your seaven hand canoe two of the Chiefe leaders that designed to have surrounded my longboat on the rocks, and affterwards attempted to desert, but was brought back hither, whose names are Thomas Herrington, a tall man, and Paul Deverix, a short man. I request the succour of you to cause them to be secured in your Castle untill my returne, for they are soe refractory they will doe noe service, but corrupt others I like well. I desire you to sattisfie the canoe men, l being a strainger to their affair, and place it to my accompt till my returne. They carried off come to our longboat three tripps. Pray tell Capt. Barterá I have sent the box of trumpets and Mr Pearsons boy by the said canoe. 153 Soe wishing you health and happiness, and returning you humble thanks for your sivility, hopeing to kiss your hands suddenly. [Daniel arrived at Tantumkweri 24 Aug. 1698, to take in com (no.1059).] 1433. Josiah Daniell P[rince] O[range], Tantumquerry, 28 Aug. 1698 I received yours of the 27th by Eggin, and observe the contents, and am glad have the oppertunity of exchangeing, for indeed I was nott well sattisfied in the other, for I bcleive he would not have been just to his principall s, and then Icould not well understand him, butt thought to have made the drummer linguist,butt I found they would have too well agreed together, I hope this wiJI be morefor the good of the board. 154 Here is a very bad landing place, which has causedus to spend a long time here. Wee could nott gctt off above forty chests a day,and at length splitt our great 7 hand canoe in two peices fore and afft Fryday last, and have had my carpenter ashore ever since, to patch her up, and shall launchher tomorrow. The Captain of the Towne, Sccntia ,iss was on board this day, and promised they should carry the come about the next point to leward about a mile or two,where tis better landing, if nott it won't be worth while to tarry here, tis soeuncertaine. The Black that Capt Barter recommend[ed) would fai.ne goe downeto AJampo, but I doc not think it conven ient, bcleiving that he may hinder us inour business, soe I designe to pull him on shore here or att Winneba. Soewishing you health and happiness, hopeing to kiss your hands suddenly. [He was expected to call at Winneba , to collect slave s (no.1177), buthis subsequent voyage fell within the hiatus in the correspondence inSept.-Dec. 1698.] 