xv FOREIGN CORRESPONDENTS Like that for 1686-8, the correspondence for 1691-9 includes a small number of letters from non-English correspondents. The most substantial and informa.tive series (which is therefore placed first in this chapter) comprises letters received from the local Director-General of the Dutch West India Company (WIC). There are also three letters received from Portuguese correspondents, and a single letter from the Brandenburg African Company. These clearly did not represent the entirety of letters received in Cape Coast from foreigners, but evidently such letters were entered into the Cape Coast letter-book s only haphazardly, or at least the instructions relating to their recording were not consistent over time. 1 The letters from the WIC are mostly in Dutch but three of them are in French, those from P01tuguese correspondents are all in Portuguese, but the letter from the Brandenburg Company is recorded in English. For one of the Dutch letters and two of the Portuguese, translations into English are also entered, and in these cases it is the texts of these translations which are included here (with annotations indicating necessary corrections). Letters which appear only in Dutch, French and Portuguese in the original manuscript are presented here in translations prepared by or for the present editor, this newly translated materia l being distinguished by being put into italics. It should be noted that the dates of these non-English documents appear all to be in 'New Style', currently ten days in advance of the 'Old Style' employed by the English, except that in two cases (nos 1435, 1456) the date is given according to both calendars. DUTCH WEST INDIA COMP ANY (ELMINA) A total of 18 letters were registered as received from the WIC, over the period from January 1694 to February 1696. The se were all written from the WIC's headquarters at Elrnina,2 by two successive Directors-General of the Company, the first from Joel Smits (who served 1689-94), and the others from Johan Staphorst (1694-6). Evidently, there were other letters received from Elmina in the period of this correspondence, which were not entered in the Cape Coast letter-books.3 This was clearly an occasional rather than a regular correspon .dence, relating to particular matters which arose between the two Companies from time to time; and, given the general ly poor relations between the English and Dutch in West Africa at this time,4 they all relate to disputes, over such questions as competing claims to territorial rights (at Komenda), the 'panyarring' of persons and goods, and the harbouring of deserters. Also included here, for convenie nce of cross-reference, are two letters from an officer of the RAC itself while he was held hostage by the Dutch in Elmina, in 1695, in the course of one of these disputes (nos 1446, 1448). 1434. Joel Smits Castle of St George d'Elmina, 1 Feb 1694 [in Dutch]5 It is a matter which is known to all the world, and especially those experienced concerning the events on the Coast of Africa in Guinea, that the Portuguese nation by virtue of the forts and properties [omission?], which our State and the Company at the cost of goods and blood has conquered in a just war against the Portuguese, and the trade occurring there, to be its own, in the regions granted by the natives, or bought from the same fora sum of gold, to the exclusion of all others, without their having held [any} in reserve for themselves, to sell or grant later to friendl y nations. If we should bring up all the violations the English nation has commilted on this Coast to the great injury and irreparable damage of the Netherlands Company, we could raise it at length, but to be brief, they set some people to build a fort at Craa, a musket shot from our lodge, watching for the time when we were in dispute with the King of Great Acraa6 in the year 1674, 7 by which we were also obliged to build a fortress, so as not to be dispossessed one day of the Company 's property, 8 as also at 'Zacconde,9 [and} at Dickies Shoo.ff otherwise called Jnfuma in our directorship, 10 and at Commany in the year 1668 in the directorship of the late Mr Dirk Wilree, although he protested at that time against Mr Thomas Pearson agent for the Royal Company, 11 which refused to leave the place and afterwards held it in its possession until the Commany war in the year 1688, when they were obliged to abandon the same, therefore it cannot be judged, although the English unrightfully had a lodge at Commany in its possession for twenty years, that the Netherlands West India Company should have lost its right, and are bound to tolerate the English again, because the same was already granted in the year 1641 in the directorship of Mr Jacob Ruyghaver on behalf of the High and Mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, and the same General Chartered West India Company, 12 and afterwards renewed in the directorship of Jasper van Heussen in the year J659, since the English nation began to importune the King of Cominay to have a lodge on the shore alongside the Hollanders, 13 whence the land from the River Chama to Elmina, as far as the jurisdiction of the King of Great Cominay extends, [was] sold to the Netherlands Company for sixteen bendas gold, with the following condition., that the Commanies should have no power for them or their successors to grant to other nations whoever they may be, any towns or places to conduct trade or commerce there, build houses, lodges or forts, indeed not even to land, or to be permitted to do anything that would break with the latter, and this right [so] obtained their High & Mightinesses the Lords States General of the United Netherlands and the same Chartered West India Company may proclaim, which they shall be in a position to ordain against anybody who shall wish to prejudice it in such a way, as against that they should be willing to withdraw what is theirs, which they have occupied solely and heritably, to which they vow faithfully to assist and maintain the same, since on our right to the foresaid coast and what is dependent on or of it, granted once and for all, we shall do and announce anything to keep and maintain it against any deliberate or undeliberate means to the prejudice of these acts of cession and grant, from which it is sufficiently established that the whole shore from Elmina westward to the River Chama bordering on the territory of the king of Jab/ 4 belongs to the Netherlands Company as its property, therefore we wish by these to warn your Honours in a ve,y friendly and neighbourly way not to make an attempt on this Commany shore, whether by force of arms or surreptitious means to corrupt the natives, as also at all places which the Netherlands Company has conquered by right of arms and have been granted by the natives and bought for gold, whereby the trade or commerce occurring there belongs to the Company as its property, otherwise we shall be forced to take in hand other measures, and since the King of England is united with their High and Mightinesses the Lords States General in a ve,y close alliance with each other, we will not hope that your Honours will [word illegible] and disturb the same between the two nations, but as peace .loving persons they will be contented with the places and forts which they presently have in their possession, but in case they happen to undertake the contra,y, we protest in the name and on behalf of their High & Mightinesses the Lords States General of the United Netherlands together with the same General Chartered West India Company that we wish to be free of such damages, accidents and inconveniencies which the English and our nation may come to meet by your Honours' unrightful enterprises, as we on our side likewise will behave according to our bounden duty to take care of and maintain that which rightfully belongs to the Netherlands Company in full ownership, and otherwise to behave so as to cultivate the good alliance between both nations. 1435. John Staphorst [Mina],15/25 March 1694 [in Dutch & English translation] 15 Your letter I receive d with a great deall of joy, L6 and if you please to honour me with your company here it will be very accep table. The Cheife of Shuma ['Sama' in Dutch text] has adv ised me that he has not forceab ly taken any of the Royall Companyes goods, but interlope rs, 17 which the natives brought under the Castle and were conveying them up the river, 18 soe now if you can prove they were the Companyes it's your part to certifie it further, as for our parts 19 we shall never allow itt that such sort of goods shall be brought under our Forts, as you yourselves will seize upon all Dutch goods brought under your forts & factories &ca, and we shall be ready to give the Royall Company our reasons for what we doe,20 but that on the contra ry that all good civility, harmony & co1Tespondency be used between our two nations, and if their be any thing to the contrary lett us know it.21 1436. John Staphorst Mina, 3 April 1693/4 [in French] Up to the present we have not had the means to reconcile the business between the people of Accome and those of Cabes Terra,22 my [word illegible] of which being to be able to do it with the understanding of our two nations. For that purpose we ask you to send some qualified person here on a fixed day, to take part in a meeting that we will be having with lmufan, 23 to put an end to this unfortunate war, which we hope will be of great profit to our two Companies. 1437. John Staphorst Castle of Mina, 6 April 1694 [in French] In reply to your kind letter l will tell you that up to the present the people of Cabess Terra have made no proposal for peace, but we hope, if you are pleased to send some deputies on your behalf here, with the General of Accany, on a fixed day which you will be pleased to name, to consult together with the Kings of Comendo, Zaboe, the Fetuers and the Brajfo of Fantin, 24 or else their deputies, whom we will be causing to come here expressly to put an end to this wa,~ which is so detrimental to our two Companies, that is to say with a lasting peace, or else to put those of Cabess Terra to a fatal rout.25 1438. Johan Staphorst Myna, 17 April 1694 [in Dutch] Have received your Honours' letter, that your factor from Succondee is arrived there, and asserts that it was English goods which were carried w Sama, [which] may well be true, but we say that he is lying, and that they are interloper goods,26 and supposing [they are] English Royal Company['s], French, Danes, Swedes, or whatever nation it should be whose goods were brought under the Noble West Indian Company's fortresses, we shall cause the same to be confiscated, without thinking of restoring it in the future. 1439. Jaan Staphorst Mina, 23 Nov. 1694 [in Dutch] We send herewith Captain Yan Hendrik Veltkamp and Abram Schepmoes,21 together with the ensign of this castle, in order, first, to greet and offer service to your Honours in my name, and second, that the fore.said Captain Veltkamp now has also brought from the fatherland a power of attorney relating to the estate of the deceased Goutsmits Wyhuyaens, 28 and third and most specially, that since a few days ago some fickle persons both from your Honours and also some from our side they had the audacity to move from the service of one of the companies to the other, as only last week a sailor from one of your ships came here and requested employment, to prevent all which disorders and bring things to a good conclusion, we should be ve,y happy that your Honours and also [we] on our side should solemnly promise each time to make amends, for as well as against these people, to send them back again, to which end we send these our delegates there to write an oath in our name and souls to keep no people that come here from your Honours' service, but to turn them away, and accordingly send them back, which we will [ also Jexpect from your side, so that we may live in a good understanding and intelligence between our two nations, or thal reasons to the contrary may be given us by your Honours, [and we] to take our own measures accordingly. 1440. John Snaphorst Mina, 26 Nov. 1694 [in French] Capt. Velcompt and his company have given us your kind leuer. We find your suggestions one with the other of good unity, by which I desire to maintain on our side in holy faith, with promise of not giving false grounds.29 You are pleased to say that the friendship was first broken by us, I do not know what is the offence I have committed. I understand from your Mightiness that we have kept here the people from Zacconde. 30 I promise you that I have no knowledge of all that, but we know very well that a little time ago an English slave from Zacconde who fled here, and we at once brought him back to Caba Corso, and my servant, who brought the slave, is also the bearer of this letter. If you presume that we, that there are some slaves of the Royal Company here, I have no knowledge of it. I desire that your Bomba come here to see if he recognises anybody here in the blacks' village &ca. I promise to lend a hand to those who will be sent to fetch them. 1441. Jan Staphorst Mina, 18 Dec. 1694 [in Dutch] We have received your agreeable letter dated this month, whereby your Honours write to us you have sent a sergeant and some slaves somewhere to maintain the Royal African Company's right, in which he was prevented by one of our factors by cannon fire, 31 and that we are consequently the aggressors by breaking the peace and good alliance on both sides, without you set down thereby where this affair happened. We make clear that we are unaware of such ,natters, with request that you will in answer to this let us have where this occurred, thus we are disposed to uphold scrupulously the above-mentioned peace, for which we will then draw up such orders that your Honours shall have no reasons for complaint in that respect. 1442. Johannes Staphorst Myna, 1 March 1695 [in Dutch] We are also given to understand that the Quufta [= Quiff a] and lnquira blacks are dispatching an army to Aguoffo, to subject and conquer it, 32 but whether they will also attack your Honours' possession at Commendo is still unknown to me, and in any case we have no knowledge of what they will do to your Honours' Fortress, and I hope also not to ours, for which reason we have sent two capital ships there for the security of our Fortress there.33 We on our side wish to maintain scrupulously the friendship between both nations promised to them, so in case any harm befalls your Honours' fortress at Commendo, it is not to be imputed to me. We have taken care of ours as a precaution so well that we already have two ships lying there, as stated. In the event that many marks gold in goods had not been sent by your Honours to the natives, as is still recently said, and which they have now refused [from] them, no war would ever have occurred, because the natives are only merchants who want to have a free access for trade.34 1443. Johan Snaphorst M ina, 27 March 1695 [in Dutch] I have received your Honours' letter, this serves as answer thereto, that the Mina Cabbezz,eers had had some canoes sent to sea in the night, to watch whether any small canoes of Caho Corso were coming past here, [and) in case they were then to take the canoes and rowers, for the reason that the Mina Cabbezzeers understand that 16 to 17 Mina women and children are held captive at Cabo Corso in your Honours' fortress, without the Cabbezzeers can bring to mind the reasons why your Honours hold so many people cap1ive, so therefore the Cabbezzeers as a matter of duty have thought fit to take retaliatory action, so that thereby the captives at Caho Corso might be set free, so that your Honours cannot impute to us that we have committed any hostility on our side, which should come to the point of war between our two nations, but on the contrary we have to live in a good understanding with you. We have this morning given the white man who was in one of the canoes passage to Caho Corsoe, together with one of our slaves to escort him. 35 I doubt not they shall be safely arrived there and your Honours shall have a report. Your Honours' canoes are still here, so in case your Honours please to free the Min.a captives there, then the Cabbezzeers shall restore your Honours' canoes, together with the rowers. Meanwhile we can assure your Honours we had not the least knowledge of this business, but on the contra,y wish to maintain good . b tá 36neig our mess. 1444. Johannes Staphorst Mina, 31 March 1695 [in Dutch] The bearers are the Mina Cabbezzers, the reasons for their going there from here consist in this, to request your Honours that the Mina people who were panyarred at the Fresh Rive? 7 by the Cabo Corse Blacks may be set free, that is both those who may be kept in your Honours' Fortress, and those who may be outside your Honours' Fort. The Cabezzeers have yesterday released your Honours' canoes and rowers, in the hope that the Mina people also may be freed there, which I am also requesting by these, to remove all misunderstandings. 38 1445. Johan Staphorst Mina, 19 Sept. 1695 [in Dutch) The day before yesterday two persons deserted from here to Cabo Cors, without our knowing the reasons for this. They are a man named Willem Homma, an assistant in rank, 39 and the othei-a soldier, wherefore I am requesting by these, if the persons are at Caba Cars, that your Honours please send them here to give reasons for running away. lfyou do so, we on our side shall always are prepared to do the same, and not neglect to live in. a good harmony between. both Companies. 40 1446. Lawrence Keck Mina, 26 Oct. [OS= 5 Nov. NS] 1695 After my most humble service to your worship & the other two Gentlemen, these are to acquaint your worships that I and Mr Puplet are here detained by the General i, who will not let us goe, he sayes, till you return him all the Dutchmen that are lately come from hence & entertain' d there. I have told him that he was the first breaker of the accord or agreemen t that was formerly betw ixt you . As to me I have noe part nor share in it, but if hee keeps me here I must expect satisfaction from him for the damage I shall sustain in the celler at Cabo Corso, which is now in my hands, & have noebody there to manage it but a little boy that can neither write nor read, as also for this my fal e imprisonn[ment]. I have told him also that he takes verry strong measures to think to gett his men, whom he has driven away by his ill usage, by keeping me here. However pray lett him worke his capprice out. He offers me his table here, which I shall not accept of, but am willing to undergoe the greatest severity he deares inflict upon me. Pray, Sirs, let my boy lock up the celler & deEver noe dri11ck to any body till he hears further from me . Soe desiring your worships to take your owne measures, without any respect at all to me.41 1447. Johan Staphor t Mina, 5 Nov . 1695 [in Dutch] We have received your Honours' pleasant letter of today's date, to which shall only say in answer that we are always excessively willing to live in a good harmony and union between both nations, because we also have such a close alliance in Europe, that {there should be] no difference, even as a man is paired with his wife, however we find that it is not observed in such a way as we expect from your side, because we have recently addressed a civil letter to your Honours on the point of Company servants on both sides, who sometimes through debauchery are desperate to move from one to the other's service, & so may leave and desert their lords and masters, which still happened again a little time ago, but in order that we may have a final end of it, it is our wish that your Honours please hand over the persons recently deserted from here to Caho Cors into the hands of the Company, on condition that we are ready and willing to hand over the persons that entered themselves into employment here. We shctll however still keep under arrest the people who came here yesterday to consult with the surgeon, to treat them according to their merits, we hereby not being able to fail to say that it should be our entire pleasure, as is filling between neighbours, to live in a good unity, to remove all troubles. Therefore we beg you Gentlemen once more in a wholly friendly manner that your Honours shortly please to decide to send back the Company's servants, which then. will also be the only means to put our mutual problem to rest. 1448. Lawrence Keck Mina , 26 Oct. [OS:= 5 Nov. NS] 1695 Yours of the date above is received, & the General] also has received your worships, & first eem'd inclinable to Jett us come away, but upon second thoughts has ordered me to acquaint your wor hips that if you pl[e]ase to discharge his people at Cabo Corsoe, he fait(h]ful ly promises to doe the like here, and all shal be forgotte n & forgiven on both sides, & noe punishment, but to receive a generaJI amnisty or pardon and to enter a firm alliance de novo, that neither side shall for the time to come entertain one anothers people, which he promises inviolably to observe and perlorrne on his part, & to doe all friendly offices that leye in his power, which he sayes if your worships refuse you doe thereby declare that you seeke neither pease not quiett , and fu1ther saye[s], if your worships had sent the last time, or demanded jn the world, he would not have entertained Page. For my part I see noc end of this affaire, but leave your good worships to take your owne measures & methods, humbly desiering when your worships sent next my boy may send me the things T write for in the margent [=margin]. 1449. John Staphorst Mina , 8 Nov. 1695 (in Dutch] We have thought fit to send herewith Mr Fiscael Schorer, to hand back your Honours' Lieut. Keck and book-keeper, and at the same time to make such a conclusion and finn stand in our name, that no further disagreements between both Companies' servants may occur, and that all those which may run away from either side's service shall be sent back right away, and at the same time that your Honours also then please send here chose who are there. Being satisfied, we also hand over the Englishman who recently came here.42 By so doing we shall come to and end once and for all and arrive at no fwther troubles in thefuture. What we have to say in this we refer to the mouth of our fiscael, who I d-0ubtnot shall reach an amicable settlement with your Honours in a good understanding. Mina, 11 Nov. 1695 [in Dutch]1450. Johan Staphorst We allow ourselves to be very pleased at the business which our Fiscael has transacted with your Honours, we promising under solemn oath sincerely to uphold the same, in which your Honours must by no means make difficulties, and likewise in thefuture for anything that may be for refreshment or other service, please command freely. 43 1451. Johan Staphorst Castle d'Elmina, 4 Jan. NS 1696 [in Dutch] We received yesterday your Honours' letter of 23'1December 1695 old style by your Honours' Lieutenant Mr Keck, by which your Honours please to note you are in.formedtha.tthe Captain of the English cruiser the Resolutio11in afriendly manner handed over his commission to one of our ships, to show it, but that the said Captain with 10 of his people were taken prisoner, 44 and that your Honours therefore request that they should be sent to you without delay, & likewise satisfaction as to whai power or authority we or our subordinates have to arrest them. Yesterday we were not yet in a position to reply to the one or the other, therefore we did not wish to detain the said Mr Keck, because he was inclined to leave, so this now serves as answer, that we cannot disapprove our captain of the ship Besche,mer, that he has authority to try to take whatever ships show themselves on this Coast, & not being well able to understand the said cruiser's commission which was shown, in the mean time made sure of handing over this affair from the forementioned persons to our judgement and orders, for which precaution and the freedom of this Coast our forementioned ship was specially sent here by our lords and masters, without our being inclined to do any annoyance or wrong to any of our neighbours or allies, but we can sincerely testify that we have not been able to get any sufficienl satisfaction from the said Cruiser to agree to your Honours' request, because although they profess to have come here solely to inflict injury on the common French enemy, yet we cannot understand what advantage they can expect where nobody but Hollanders, English & Branden.burgers are settled, & consequently in this time of war no French merchants will venture to come to trade on this Coast, where we are so strong in Castles and ships, much less understand any benefit for them for which they nevertheless principally come out to look for French privateers or war ships with their small ship, wherein is nothing bw striking a blow, without any profit to gain, which consideration gives us reason for apprehension that they have some other secret design in view, all the more so because we have a still fresh example not 5 years past, that a certain English ship also coming here out of the point of New Netherlands, 45 set on for piracy, & tried to attack one of the Company's costly ships, which like dangers we are bound to prevent as much as possible, but to show that we are disposed to live with your Honours and your Honours' nation according to our new alliance, we say we are ready to comply with your Honours' request & to let the said eleven persons go to your Honours, provided your Honours send us beforehand a written security or guarantee that the said ship the Resolution with its people will not hann any of our ships ranging on this coast, or that your Honours will make good all such damages, because we presume that your Honours are well able to fulfill this for their own nation, but if your Honours are unwilling to do so, it is our opinion subject to correction that the said ship and people are no concern. of your Honours or your Honours' Royal Company, and that we shall behave with them in this matter as we shall think fit for the welfare of all our ships, goods etc. ranging on this Coast. 1452. Johan Staphorst Mina, 5 [Feb.]46 1696 [in Dutch] We have received your Hon.ours' letter of the 26th January old style by your Honours' Lieutenant Mr Keck, in. which your Honours write us of a matter of which we still have no knowledge, and which in our opinion also does not concern us, 47 however you write that your Honours wish to oblige us not only by threats and protests, but also to warn us about our new agreement that we have made to get involved in issues which your Honours' blacks may have with ours, but we leave that to their decisions, otherwise we should perhaps be able to show that the blacks here have {done] no great wrong, but Ieuing that go, we say only that we on our side will behave towards your Honours' nation as we have promised, however we think we are not bound to preserve your Honours' people and fortresses, which your Honours claim are facing danger, to the prejudice of our own blacks. We have enough to do to preserve our own against all enemies, & to keep watch against all harmful practices, which we now and then learn are contrived against us by our friends and allies. 1453. John Staphorst Mina, 12 Feb. 1696 [in Dutch] Today received a letter from Cormantyn by which we were advised that the day before yesterday a Company's servant named Casparus Willigins fled from said Cormantyn to Caho Cors, wherefore, because we are now living in good alliance, and in conformity with the recently made agreement, we will not doubt that your Honours shall have the goodness to send the Company's servant here, & the same [i.e. the writer} also guarantees to have the expenses which shall fall therein brought in ready money.48 PORTUGUESE CORRESPONDENTS All these three letters were either written or transmitted by Loureni;;o de Souza Rego, also mentioned elsewhere in the Rawlinson correspondence, who was a ship's captain based on the Portuguese island of Sao Tome. 49 The fir t two relate to the seizure of goods from a P01tuguese ship by the Dutch at Elmina in 1693;50 the third is from an otherwise unidentified correspondent in Sao Tome in 1696, promising a sistance to English ships calling there. 1454. Lourenco de Souza Rego Acara, 4 Sept. 1693 [in Portugue e & English translation] With this Jetter 1 send your Worships a paper made by [my] Purser, 51 to which wee have all signed, how the Generall of the Mine Joel Smith obliged us to signe a paper made by his fiscal! John Teleman, who e language wee understand not, and by word of mouth told us hee had writt how the English had given his people many blowes, which wee swear never hapned, and that it is a lye, but the fear wee was then in made u igne the paper , for which reason wee have made this which goe here inclosed, both to hew our own honesty and to declare the many complaints wee have against the Generali of the Mine, who robbd us, a also of [ = against] their ships of which one George Vandique is commander. 1455. Antonio de Andrade, Manoel Afonso Monteiro, Joas de Meytelles Furtado, Lourenco de Souza Rego, Joas Bauptista Crey Acara Fo1t, 4 Sept. 1693 [in Portugue e & English translation] I, Anthony de Andrade, Ma ter of the ship called our Lady of the Clouds and Lady Catherine, 52 and Emanuel Afonso Monteiro , Purser of aid ship, and wee here underwritten , say that on the 21st in August in the year 1693, comeing on the Coa t of the Mine, 53 the Dutch from the Castle of the Mine took u almost under Cabo Corso to robb u , and at the same tyme the Engli h from the shipps that were at the fortification of Cabo Cor o cam on board to carry u to their said fortification, seing they would take u under it and under theirs of the Mine, comeing on board to carry us along with them, which was what wee all desired, for that they treate us with more civility and honesty then them at the Mine. There arose some difference betweene said Dutch and English, at which ryme the English by consent of the Dutch, who were much affraid of them, tooke away some things, which the GeneraJl of Cabo Corso understanding, ordered us to bee paid, and [ we] went to the Mine , where the Generali Joel Smith sent his fiscall to robb us of 8 barrells and some anchors of rumme and two feiches of sugar,54 and 9 rolls of tobacco, this besides what the Dutch seamen belonging to their ships took forcibly from us, for all which they wouJd pay us nothing, but forced us to signe a paper the contents whereof wee knew not, being written in Dutch, which language wee understand nothing of, wherefore both for the defence of the English as also to satisfy our consciencyes wee have made this, which att all tymes wee protest to owne under the oath of the holy Evangellists. 1456. Hironymo de Andrada S[ao] Thome, Jan. 17/7 1696 [in Portuguese) Your Lordships could not oblige me with a greater gift of support for me more valued than the letter from your hands of 12 September of last year, which J received from the hand of Capt. Lourenco de Souza Rego, who is the bearer of this reply, 55 because being a messenger he deserves to get the honours he always receives from your Lordships and which also belong to me as being concerned in all your affairs. For the gentlemen Generals and Captains of ships I must to do what I can for them, having previously little power {to do so], but now I can do what they deserve, because I have always been attached to the English nation, & every time that anyone whatever arrives at this affiliated house he will .find here his shelter[?], which is or will be also the same {as] from your Lordships, whom God protect. BRANDENBURG AFRICAN COMPANY (GROSS-FRIEDRICHSBURG) The single letter from the Brandenburg African Company was received from its headquarters Gross-Friedrichsburg ('Frederick' in this document) in 1698; its substance is slight, but serves to illustrate the good relations the Brandenburg Company enjoyed with the RAC. 1457. JD [Visser]56 [Fort] Frederick, 30 July 1698 This day, being the 2th instant [ ic], received your Honours letter, which your Honours servant [delivered], the same belonging to the deceased Generali Jean Van Leer, who was on the 5th day of Aprill last intered.57 Wee cannot forbeare to give your Honours many thanks for your good wishes about the arivall of our shipps, and have not forebore lo ask our Captain[s] if they knew of any of your Honours shipps to windward, but they answer me the[y] knew not of any, nor what news there was from England. Wee expect one more of our shipps very suddenly, when shall acquaint your Honours of what news presents, and your Honours may be assured I shall not forbeare to acquaint your Honours of what comes to my hands. PS. Yesterday passed by one Engli 'h great hipp. which suppose is one of your Honours Companys shipps.58 