I DIXCOVE In the 1680s the westernmo t e tablishment which the RAC maintained on the Gold Coast was at Sekondi ('Succondee ' in these documents) , but in the 1690s one was established 30 km further west (80 km west of Cape Coast), at D.ixcove ('Dickie's Cove'). 1 An attempt by the RAC to establish a factory here in 1684 had been abortive,2 but a claim to the place was maintained. In 1691, as reported in correspondence from Sekondi (no.153), the Brandenburg African Company made an attempt to settle at Dixcove, and this provoked the RAC to revive its interest. A first attempt to establish a factory was made from October 1691 (nos 161-3); this was evacuated in the face of a local war, but revived fears of Brandenburg intervention led to i.ts reoccupation in March 1692 (nos 175, 177). Correspondence from the Dixcove factory is entered in the Rawlinson corpus only from August 1692; evidently earlier it reported to Sekondi, rather than directly to Cape Coa t Castle. 3 The new e tablishment was fortified, but its construction proceeded at a leisurely pace; in 1694 it was described as 'not half finished' , having only 'a few small guns planted upon the rock under the fort open' for its defence ,4 and it was still unfinished in 1698 (no.136). 5 From 1694 the Dix.cove fort established trading relations with Denkyira ('Dankera' etc.), the rising power in the interior of the western Gold Coast, and a major supplier of gold (no.49).6 However, Dixcove in the 1690s was of only minor importance for trade in gold, having a reputation for supplying adulterated gold.7 At this period, it al o provided only mall numbers of slaves. When the factory was reoccupied in 1692, it was anticipated to be rather 'a good place for corn and at wooding and watering'. 8 It also served, as this corresponde nce illustrates, the function of sending advice to Cape Coast of the approach of shipping from the west. The Brandenburg African Company held two forts Lothe west of Dixcove, which are referred to in this correspondence: its headquarters Gross-Friedrichsburg (at modern Prince's Town), 20 km from Dixcove (generally referred to as 'the Brandenburgs' Fort'), and a second (Fort Dorothea), at Akwida 'Ocada', 'Ockado u', etc.), mid-way between Gross-Friedrichsburg('Accoda', and Dixcove. 9 The Dutch West India Company had a fort (Fort Batensteyn) , at Butri ('Buttre' , 'Butteroe' etc.), 15 km east of Dixcove, which is likewise frequently referred to, mainly in connection with its alleged sponsorship of anti.English intrigues. In the 1680s, Dixcove had been regarded as belonging to the country of 'Incassa' ('Ancosa ' in this correspondence), as distinct from Ahanta ('Anta') to lhe east, which included Butri and Sekondi; but by the 1690s the former had lost its coastal territory, and Dixcove also was considered to belong to Ahanta. 10 Events recorded in this correspondence may relate to this process of absorption. Ahanta was dominated at this time by its northern neighbour Adorn ('Adoom'), 11 whose forces repeatedly raided the coastal area. Dix.coveitself had been attacked shortly before the first English attempt to settle there in October 1691, probably by the Adorns (no.162). Later in 1691 tensions between Adorn and Ahanta in1ersected with internal divisions within the latter, and Dixcove also was drawn into the conflict. An Ahanta chief called Asirifi (' Ashrevy', 'Asherry' etc.) took refuge at Dixcove, provoking an attack on the town by his enemies within Ahanta (nos 164, 167-8); the Adorns in turn intervened in support of Asirifi's opponents, and threatened Dixcove in 1692-3 (nos 1-2 etc.). Asirifi remained at large, operating as mobile warlord along the coast, generally in support of the Dutch interest against the English, and in turn threatened the English fort at Dixcove in 1694 (no.50), and did eventually attack it in 1696 (during one of the hiatuses in the Rawlinson correspondence). Dixcove itself was divided in its allegiance, some of its people supporting Asirifi but others identifying with the English. By 1697, the fort's correspondence was referring to the local community with which it dealt as the 'Ahantas' (nos 108 etc.). 1. Christopher Clarksone Dicldes Cove, 15 Aug. 1692 [to Thomas John on, chief of the RAC fort at Sekondi] 12 J have already informed that when I cam[e] to Dickies Cove I found that all the people were fled, and that with the slaves 13 and canoemen gott 2 guns ashore, a 3dI planted in the canoe for our better security if we should have been repulsed. After I had gott the flag hoysted I fired 2 guns to keep of [ = off] our enimies and encouradge our friends .14 Understanding by one of Captain Dickie 15 boys who came to me in a small canoe that he was fled to Ockadou s, I sent to him a little of brandy and de ired to ee him , upon which he ent me 2 more of his boyes [blank space in original] wellcome . 16 The next day he ent his brother and kinsman to give me a fatich [= fetish] 17 to be true to him and not to Jett the Adoomes take him away, which I took, binding his kinsman in the same that Captain Dickie and all his people should willingly assist in bringing of ston[e] and other necissaries for building of the Fort, in which I find them very willing , asking no more then [ = than] a dram for their dayes work, which 4 flask will not performe , our camp consisting of 12 Cabbosbeers 18 and about 80 fighting men (our slaves women , children & boyes which know not the use of armes excepted), being all in camp on the hill where our Fort must stand. Ye terday Captain Dickie layed some gold under the foundation tone and killed a fatt sheep, 19 which I could [not?] performe, haveing the ground to [blank] our tents to make the foundation to digg . Workmen and lyme, bricks and deall boards will be [what] most I shall want, hopeing to gett most of the timber neer the [blank] , for which I desire Bass Johns assistance, 20 and the sauiers [ = sawyers] and smith, the stone being very hard. Provision as yett is very scarce only [i.e. except] come, of which as yett we have enough . Captain Dickie expects a cloth or something for a dashee.2 1 I di patched the canoe the 13th day to fetch the slaves, pray hast[e] them as much as you can. The Cabbosheers expect all to have cloth of blue Welsh plaines , and I am forcied [=forced] to speak them fairr. This is all at present only my love to you, Mr Edwards and the rest of your men. Dicl<iesCove. 26 Sept. 16922. Christopher Clarksone I have most humbly made bold to give your Worships to understand that on the 22th instant I received a letter from Mr Johnson, Factor at Succondee, as also on the 27th [sic= 24th?), which speciefyed as followeth, vizt that I protected the Adoomes enemies, not nominating any persones but one Neddee, one of the Cheif[s] of this place, which as I understand is for the promotion of the English interest and much respected by Captain Dickie and the rest of the Cabbosheers. [blank] of the said letters, and understanding the Buttre men or Asherves [= Ashreve's) party haveing the day before ingadged the Adoomes,22 and the said Captain Neddee being privat[e]ly departed hence and at Buneroe, I sent the rest of his familly to him, for which reasone the rest of the Cabbosheers would have gone and resided at Ocada, beleiveing that Captain Dickie and I had dealt unjustly with them, but after were reconcealcd [= reconciled] again and Captain Dickie with 9 more of the Chief[s] took a fetich to be true to the English, and noewise to ingadge against the Adooms without [being] molested by them first. J also took the same stiU to protect them as long as they keept their fctich and all were well satisfied. I should have had the guns mounted upon the flancker23 by this time were it not for exces[s]ive rains we have had here. I have been verry iU disposed in body, and were it not for one roan, a soldier belonging to Mr Johnson at Succondee , who hath used his endeavour much, I might have been in my grave. His name is William Morrell, and fl] most humbly desires your Worships would grant me he may remaine here with me, here being not one upon occasion can drese [= dress]24 or look after a man, and we are daily not without some small desasters or others. I have sent to Succondee some mauUs and crows25 to be mended at Cabo Corso, but I have not had them since. Dickies Cove, J Oct. 16923. Christopher Clarkson According to your Worships command I have indcavoured to the utmost of my power in getting the canoes your Worshipps required,26 but found them not fitting for service, being all old but new bumt27 and fitted up, and so amongst them all I have found and bought one large 7 hand canoe new and am promised by a Black man that makes them to be fitted with the rest specifyed in your letter in three or 4 dayes. I am much troubled at the unfortunat[e] death of Mr Gregory,28 and wish your Worships more prosperous dayes then he did. 4. Christopher Clarkson Diclcies Cove, [10?]29 Oct. 1692 I have mo t humbly made bold to present to your Worships these to lett your Worships understand I have been at great expence for your service and want many bricks, with lime and deall board for the covereing of the flancker. The smith I have sent again [i.e. back], being no wayes fitt for ervice, and desire of your Worshipps to send by the first oppertunity George Walker. So haveing gave your Worshipps a full accompt in my last I conclude. [PS] I once more make bold to de ire of your Worshipps more guns for encouragment of the natives. 5. Christopher Clarkson Dickies Cove, 12 Oct. 1692 I have most humbly made bold to give your Worshipps to understand that Capt. Jeffryes is safe arrived here,30 and have from him received what your Worships sent by him, but thought I should by him had more guns and liquors for the people which dayly work aboute carrying of stones &ca for the building of the Fort, which dayly relie upon me, by which reasone I am much out of pockett for the Company int[e]rest and humbly desires your Worshipps to take it into consideration. I am informed there is two interlopers belonging to the Dutch to windward. I most humbly desire your Worshipps to satisfie Leiut. Freeman 31 what I owe him and I shall be [re]spon able again to you. 6. Christopher Clarkson Dickies Cove, 17 Oct. 1692 I have mo t humbly made bold to give your Worshipps to understand the gunns are mounted upon the flanker and do with all possibility proceed but am much detar[d]ed [=retarded] by the weather and the people being much unwilling to work, they finding not the encouradgment they expected, though I have delivered liquors of my own, by which I am much out of pockett. The slaves desire your Worshipps would be pleased to grant them there [=their] pay every two months, they finding it hard to gett provitions at this place. I have here inclosed sent what their pay comes to in 4 months, and desire you will be pleased to order Mr Johnsone for the payment of the same. I am creditably infonned the Dutch Copeman at Butteroe 32 hath profered to the Adoomes 50 bendys33 to procure the place [i.e. Dixcove) for them, which I humbly desire may be taken into consideration. Here is nothing done but by meer [= mere] compulsion by the natives, and severalls have deserted the place. If your Worshipps will be pleased lo furnish me with more gunns and arnunition I shall for the Company intresl expose my life to verry great hazards. Diclcies Cove, 25 Oct. 16927. Christopher Clarkson ditlo I have received, which gives me to understand howYours of the 17th rouguisly [=roguishlyl and ungrcatfuly [=ungratefully] this people have dealt with me, contrary to my desearts [=deserts), and doubt nol but Ha[n]sico and Quo can and will give you to know better, 34 so I hope I shall have no occasione to writte in my own vindication for what I have done. Being not ambitious to be starved, I must [=most] humbly desire your Worshipps to send a Factor hither the first convenicncy, which will much ease me of my great trouble and expence which I am daily at here in the Companys interest and all canot give satisfaction, and thereby shall be out of danger of incouring [= incurring] your displeasure, which is not my desire. I have lent Captain Hasico 12 angles out of your Worshipps gold. I once more desire you to take these into consideration, which will satisfie me. Dicl<ies Cove, 28 Oct. 16928. Christopher Clarkso n [=humb ly] made bold to give your Worshipps toI have most humble understand that the people of this place have already brocken [= broaken) their fetich taken befor(e] Hanscieo and Quo by refusing to bring stons &ca. They also denie me the men J formerly had to keep watch, I being forcied to appoint and we white men take our da[i]ly watchtwo slaves for sentorys [=sentries] 3 hours to bring the night about, only John Pimm excepte d, who not only denies it but also his work, telling me to my face I have no power to command him. I most humbly desire of your Worshipps to determ ine the case between us, for I have not power 10 restraine him from his palme wine and keeping our eniemys company. 35 I had with your leaves raither [=rather] want his compan y then he persist in his erorrs [= errors). I desire your worshipps would be pleased to Jett the slaves have their pay, for it is deficult [=difficult] here to gett canky. 36 I can allow but 2 heads of come a month for myself and the re t. I have no more then half one barreU powder Jeft to defend your interest if occa ione should happen. The Dutch Jave 37 are her very in olent in stopeing [ = stopping] your Jetter and comeing in pretence to drinck and dance in the town and after to pretend 38 to bind and carry away as prisoner the natives of this place, all which I once more de ire your Worships to consider , and I shall in duty bound in all things follow your commands. 9. Leonard [ms. 'Lenonard ' ] Jeffrye & Christopher Clark on Dickies Cove , 7 Nov. 1692 Yours we have received of the 3dlast and shall to the uttmost of our power obey your Worsbjpps commands . The sloop wants much repaireing, 39 which we desire may be done, we haveing verry good weather here, and desires you would be pleased to send by Coffee40 the thing undl'.Omominated a soon as possible may be. We have sent down AHampo in the roome of Coffee. I should have also sent John Pimm but that without knowledge he is gone and hath inticed with him two of the sloop men, and were informed [they] have made a great many lyes, as to say we have 2 whitemen in the Adoomes camp which are comeing to ingadge the natives in these parts , by which reasone the people are afrayed [=afraid] to come & depart from hence . Upon this accompt [ = account] we have this day sent some of the Companys slaves to bring them back. We desire some powder with match by the 1st conveniency , whjch will much oblidge u . For repaireing the Alligator sloope, ocum [=oakum] 7 lbs, with sheeveing [= sheathing] naills41 1000 . [inch?], other naills 200 of each , deal boards 10. 10. Christopher Clarkson Dickies -Cove , 13 Nov. 1692 Yours I have received of the 11th instant , and have received what nominated in yours and shall supply Thomas Wann with wood,42 I haveing already [done so] and for 3 weeks past have sent him ome, & for John Pimm he hath much amended himself since his arrival! from Occada, haveing worked on board the sloope, where Capt. Jeffryes desires yett that he may show his ingenouity and by him in the loope come down . I receive [=perceive] in your Worshipp information to me the General] of the Mina43 bath gave you to under tand our slaves with the Dickics Cove people hath abused their slaves, which is altogither faboulus [= fabulous). I have also received from Mr Johnsone the same,44 and that the Generali of the Mina should say we send our servants (or Companys slaves) up and down the country to sell liquor and tobacco, which is altogither as faUsc, for myself and people here 1 can swear and protest [neither] I nor any of our people sold never any liquors or tobacco here, nor in any part of the country, and accordingly have sent your Worshipps both from under my own hand and all, the which they and I are ready upon your demands to windicat [=v indicate] upon our corperall oaths45 that no such things hath been acted to the knoulcdge of any white man here, and as for the coppy of the inventory of the necissarys of the Castle, 46 I gave one to Mr White and another to Mr Elwcs, 47 but for the originall of them it is in the till48 of my chest, my freind the gunner haveing the key of it (omission in text?] writte to Mr Johnson, so hopeing these may suffice and most humbly desire your Worshipp s to asure yourselves here shall by me nor other men here nothing acted but what you shall have a just accompt by me. [PS) Capt. Jeffryes will stay here till your Worshipps commands further if not forcied to the contrary for want of come, which is not here to be gott & cannot make shift above 12dayes. Dickies Cove, 20 Nov. 1692 11. Christopher Clarkson Yours I have received the 16 ditto. I here [=hear J the Generali of Cape Trees Pintas49 hath sent two Cabboshec rs to the Generall of the Adoomes to treat about a peace, but hear not where they are. We are very bad, noone being better then another, not one being able to help another, we havcing feavers and agues. Out of the 5 men we have not one able to fire a gun, neither can we gett provitioo s for m.oney,50 being forceid to fast here sometimes 4 or 5 dayes togither to live without sustinance. I humbly desire your Worshipps to take these into consideration and if possible send a man fitt for service, and as for John Pimm he shall come down in the sloope. As for my o[e)ighbour the Dutch,5t I desire you to asure yourselves I shall in all things obey your Worshlpps commands, not only in this but in all other things you shall comma nd me. 12. Christopher Clarkson Diclcies Cove, 23 Nov. 1692 Yours I have received of the 22 instant and have also received the beefe and come, for which I returne your Worshipp most bumble thanks, and shall with all possibility imaginable procure beam accordjng to your dementions [= dimensions] , but Mr Jeffreys protests he can no ways bring them down to Cabo Corso. So haveing nothing more of importance but returneing your Worsrupps most humble thanks for your care of us. 13. Christopher Clarkson Diclcies Cove, 25 Nov. 1692 I thought it convenient to give your Worshipps to understand the news we have here [ which] seems crediable [= credible] to us. I am informed the Adoomes are comeing with all speed toward us, upon what designe is not certa[i]ne. John Caba s [= Cabess] from Commenda is arrived at Butterue with all his men, upon what accompt I know not, 52 but the people here are much dissatisfy1ed and humbly desires you would send a Factory [=Factor] hither, I myself being not able to stirr out of the roorne but thank God the rest of the men are again indiferantly recovered. Here is one roome in the round :fiancker I think may serve a Factor for the presents. I should be verry glad if the Doctor could spare us a few unguents and implasters [ = pla ters] if occasione should hap[p]en, I haveing [n]one, which I question not but can make u e of them upon occasion. I have sent down 6 musquets being not fitt for service, [omission] with flints may be sent down in their room. I have received from Mr Johnson Thomas Alner and John Warrington to remaine here. 14. Francis Smith Dickies Cove Fort, 30 Nov. 1692 According to your orders att my arrival] I took charge of the Fort, 53 which I hope in a short time will be fitt to secure any good[ ] youll be plea ed to send, but much sooner if the free people would break the stones as they did at first, for then all our slaves worked on the Fort, since which they are forcied to break the stones and bring them up, which is a great hinderance in forwarding the building . The Cabbosheers that dnmck the fetich wants cloaths, Captain Hansico can atti fie you how many they were that drunck. Capt. Jeffreys haveing the carpenter to fitt the sloop, which is the reasone that Mr Clarkson has not been ready to send per this canoe, which I have loaded with wood. The ship to windward I hear i a Barbadoes man. This with my hearty thanks for placeing me here. [PS) I have receive d from Mr Clarkson tbe following goods vizt 42/ 3 half barrells powder6 41b) basons [= basins] 20 string rangoe beads6 31b) The Adoomes are gone away. 54 Diclcies Cove Fort, 4 Dec. 1692 15. Fran cis Smith This serves only to certifie you that there is a Dutch interloper in the road and in the offcn f=offing) two or 3 ships, what they are I dout know. Yesterday pas[s)ed by two Portug[u)eeze which the Dutch has taken.55 Dickie s Cove Fort, 11 Dec. 1692 16. Francis Smith Yours of the 5th ditto have received and the first Portugueeze that comes [1] shall buy some rum upon accompt of the RoyaJI African Company of England . Herc is in the road a Barbadoes man who is bound down to Cabo Corso, haveing letters on board directed to Mr Elwes. Two or 3 dayes agoe wrotte to Mr Johnsone to send the Black carpenter up which Capt. Jefferys had to fitt his sloope, I haveing no answer from him do presume that Capt. Jeffreys has carried him to Cabo Corsoe , if so desire you would be pleased to send him up, for want of whom the bricklayer s will be forceid to lye [ms. 'buy'J.56 We are now buildin g on the 3d flanker, which I beleive it will be raise[d] by Christmas. Diclcies Cove Fort, 12 Dec. 1692 17. Francis Smith This is to certifie that here is an English interloper who reports there is no ships suff[e)red to come out.57 Diclcies Cove, 15 Dec. 1692 18. Francis Smith Yours of the 13th ditto have received wherein you have mentioned that you have ordered Mr Johnson to send John Pimm up. He mentioned in his letter to me that 't he will send him when he has done with him, and when that will be I don know. The bricklayers can work no more upon the flanker till the carpenters work is done. Just now came into the road two Dutch interlopers. 19. Christopher Clarkson Dickies Cove Fort, 29 Dec. 1692 Yours I have received of the 26th instant and in obedience to your Worships commands have called Captain Dickie with the rest of the Cabbosheers, who unanumously [= unanimou ly] deny to give any money to the Adoome ,58 but promise their uttmost assistance to the English and the Company intere t, and if the Adoomes come here to offer any violence they are resolved to tand upon their own defence, and I hope they shall find us more able to defend our elves then they may imadgine. So hopeing these may sati fi your W ors hi pp . (PS] These Cabbosheers desired to signe to these to asure your Worshipps of their fidelity to the English: Captain Dickie, Captain Bailee, Captain John, Captain Quashee, Captain Berree, Captain Quamboe. 20. Francis Smith Dickie Cove Fort, 7 Jan. 1692 [ = 1693] Per the 13 &7 hand canoe have received the following particulars for use of the Fort, vizt 24 granadoe shells, 300 naills, 100 . peakes [ = spikes],59 30 lb occum, 6 24 lb sheet[s] lead, 37 lb steell, 8 fathome 3 inch roap [=rope] , 6 deal] boards, 14 quarter casks & two hogsheads lime, 6 iron barr , with some small roope for the scaffolds. Also received one piece reed [ = red] cloth, which I de ire to know what I must do with it, if for cloaths to the Cabbosheers plea e to advise how many must have and what you allow on each cloath. The canoes could not take in the coales, which please to send per first, with some tarras60 & powder, the latter which we have is damaged. Per the canoe comes William Morrell, for whom please to send me one man more, for you have had two in the room of these two you sent up before. There is a mollatta [ = mulatto] that would be very servic[e)able here in mending the flagg, for it is almost in pieces. Thomas Plumer humbly desires of your Worshi.pps [that you] would be pleased to grant him the same sallery a other gunners have at out Factorys. This with my thanks for your kind entertainment at Christma . 21. Francis Smith Dick:ies Cove Fort, 14 Jan. 1692/3 My last was per the 13 hand canoe of the 7th ditto. The particulars therein mentioned desire may be sent, with some shells.61 Lime received before is all used and we have two curten [ = curtain] walls with one flanker to point,62 for which if you have not sent a canoe to hand please to order some shells, which will be better then lime, for one cask makes 2 of lime. We are in great want of maules , the iron barrs I received the smith tell me they will not make 3 that will be serviceable. There is att Cabo Corso Castle pieces of dreles [sic: = deals?] that would make good mauls if you would be pleased to send some. We have two men sick of a violent feaver, for which youll perceive per the inclosed accompt of canoe hire that I have charged 4 angles to Succondee for Doctor Hardine to lett them blood. If we must be forcied to send to Succondee at every time a man is sick it will be a considerable charge to the Company. Please to send me on accompt of the Royall African Company of England some money to defray the charge of canoe hier [=hire]. The charge (I have] been at is as undermentioned from ultimo November 92 to this instant 92/3 is 4oz 12a 2ta, which please to order to be paid. a laoz 0 2 2 To 2 13hand canoe canky money63 '] 0 5 6 To I 2 hand ditto to Cabo CorsoCastle which {ms.'withMr Clarkson admit1ed [= omitted?]10 pay 00 2 To ditto from Succondee when I came up 0 6 To 3 2 hand ditto aboard3 Portugueeze 6 To I 2 hand ditto aboard Englishinterlopers 0 60 I To 3 2 hand ditto aboardDutch ditto 9 0 To 5 2 hand ditto to Cabo Corsoand canky 2 6 To 2 7 hand ditto to Cabo CorsoCastle 2 0 2 0 To I 2 hand ditto to Succondeefor DoctorHardine 2 0 To 1 2 hand ditto to carry him back 0 4 12 2 Dickis Cove Fort, 20 Jan. 1692/3 22. Francis Smith Here is at anchor in the road the Antilope, an interloper, Capt. Hogbeen Commander, who was fom1erly in the Companys service.64 He gives accompt of two Company shipps of force that were coming, which be says must be on the Coast by this. We have gott round with the Fort & only stay for the carpenters. We have two here, but the best is lame with the wormes, Quashe by name. If you'l be pleased to send Bastian for a month it will be a great forwarding in the building, for the rains are coming on.65 Pray dont fail in sending some lime & tarras, itt being to cover the roomes. ln my last I gave you accompt of two men that were sick, since which all the rest are sick, soe att present here is not a man to say [is] well but the serveyour (= surveyor] & myself. [PS] Per the canoe comes a white man who came out of the interlop er. I dont think him a fitt man for this place, otherwise should have kept him tilJ I had your further orders . 23. Franci Smith Diclaes Cove, 2 Feb . 1692/3 Yours of the 20th and 23th past with 6 iron barrs and a cask of coales have received . In your first you mention that the loope is at Amer a to load with shells for this place,66 per which conveyance you designe to send me goods for to defray the charge of canoe hier I been at, which I desire may be paid me in gold if it is but era cra.67 If you send me good they will lye and spoil!, for [I have] not received a era era from the Blacks, since I hear they are soe poor that they would dayly pawne their childreen for money to buy themselves come . As for the beams for the come room its for want of carpenters we han ' t them ready to send down. In your last you mention that the white man sent doun [= down] affirms that the Company shipps are upon the Grain Coast, 68 to whom I presume may no credite give to what he sayes . In the mean time if I hear any certainy of there arrival I to windward shall advise you expres[s]ly of it. Of [=on] the 21th past [I] went to Taccarado ,69 where we may gett a considerable quantity of shells if you would but allow 3 or 4 old slaves to be ther , for to gether[=gather] them and bring them to the waterside . The great Portugeeze that lay at the Brandenburghs Fort has played the rogue to windward with the Blacks , taking them with what they had on board under English coullers [= colours ].70 [PS] I gave the Cabbosheers the cloath , the whole piece of 19 yards . The coales you sent [received]. I have some com at the Hill71 which I crave your favour that you'll be pleased to lett the loope take in. I have bought a 11 hand & 7 hand canoes which shall send by the sloope. 24. Franci Smith Dickies Cove Fort, 7 Feb. 1692/3 This comes per the Company sloope the SwaUow, Capt. Bradshaw Commander, to whome reffer you for advice of the Company hipps to the windward which he left at Axim.72 We haveing occasion for some coals and deall boards, have taken out of the said sloope 12 deaJI boards, with a small parsell [= parcel] of coales, for which haveing no orders crave your pardon. {PS)The letter received of Franck73 have sent on board the ships. The carpenters work is very backward for want of one. Quashee is still lame. Mr Johnson has sent Thomas Wann but he keeps the slaves. Per the sloope comes the two canoes I advised you of before, for which gave 7 ownces. Dick.ies Cove Fort, 16 Feb. 1692/3 25. Francis Smith Yours of the 4th & 6th ditto have received, the 1s¥ per the Alligator Sloope with 30 butts oystershells, 3 hogsheads tarras, 3 ditto coales, 2 whole barrles {=barre ls] powder and eight quarter cask rum. Also by Capt. Jeffreys received 4o 12a 2ta gold, being what I disbursed for canoe hier on accompt of the Royall African Company. Your last mentioneing that I answer to mine of the 2d ditto, wherein I desire you may send me no goods, the Blacks being very poor, and had not seen any money since I crune here, which l can safely sware [=swea r1,and all the people can justifie, as per the inclosed certificat, that I han't taken a era era, except two angles for a sheet chcst.74 ln complying with your first have put as much wood on board the sloope as Capt. Jeffreys could take in, with six beams for the come roome, for which was forceid to take all the slaves from work, which has been a great hindrance to the building, considering the rains are so nigh at hand. Provisions being very hard to be gott, the souldiers desire you'll be pleased to order beef, bread, flower [= flour] and pease for them, and that their pay may be stopt for the same at pay day. If youll allow coals and Coffee we can make bricks to serve all the battlement. I have not paid the canoe111en, which reffer till have your orders. They made 20 turns with a 7 band canoe, each man demanding 2a per turne. Please to send some sheets and knives which if you please may pay them with. [PS) Mr Johnson keeps the slaves, I don't know what occasion be has for them now the tank is finished. He also advised the Adoomes are marching this way,75 for which please to order 2 or 3 jarrs to keep water in. The slaves makes a great complaint, havciag received no pay this 18 weeks. Also received John Pimm carpenter & John Carter souldier. Please to send some looks[= locks] for the gates. fgap in corresponde nce, mid-Feb. to July 1693] 26. Thomas Edwards Dickies Cove, 9 Aug. 1693 This accompanyes Mr Francis Smith,76 of whome conforme[ably J to your orders have received all the goods and stores contained in the fort of [sic] and factory77 of Dickeys Cove belonging to the Royall Affrican Company of England, as per inventory enclosed will appeare. As I was passing by Tackerado Roads the canoe was oversett and William Harding, who was going up to visit the sick of this place, is drowned, my 2 boys, 2 canoe men and a wench belonging to one of the slaves of this place, with al] my necessarys of cloathing, & blessed be God I am delivered my selfe by the help of a two hand canoe that went along with me, though I am much bru[iJsed, which I hope will amend in time if soe be you will please to perrnitt any Doctor to come and looke after me. Being inable to enlarge shall conclude with my humble respects. PS. The great canoe was saved by the canoe which took me up. She is a little splitt but may be mended. I render you my humble thanks for this your kindness of advancement to [me]. 27. Thomas Edwards Dickies Cove Fort, 22 Aug. 1693 Yesterday I received yonrs by Wilham Marrall [= Morrell], whom you are pleased to order here to officiate as chirurgeon [ = surgeon] for this & Succonde factory, for which I render you most humble & hearty thanks. I bless God I am pritty well recovered again. As to the canoe men l can impute nothing to there blame, for on a sudaine [ = sudden] the sea did swell and broke ahead of the canoe, which filled her full of water, and the next did oversett her. Worke goes on as speedily as possible can be, and the Cabbosheers make the people bring stones when desired. Some of them complaine they have had no cloths and are dayly asking me for the same. There is wanting deale boards and tarras for covering the roofe and bricks for the battlements but above all oyster shells to make lyme for painting [=pointing] the walls before the latter raines come,78 which if not perfected will be great damage though never so great care be taken in covering it with thatch. 28. John R yves 79 Dickis Cove Fort, 6 Nov. 1693 By this you will understand that I have sent you a letter which I received from the Copeman of Occady by b.is boy, and have sent it by this bearer. 80 Here is three of the souldiers very sick and desire very much to goe downe to Cabo Corsoe Castle. Dickies Cove Fort, 24 Nov. 169329. Thomas Pilkington This to convey my thanks to you for the favour of advanceing mee,81 it shall bee my utmost endeavour to deserve it. Mr Layton will informe you in what a condition wee found this fort,82 and the severe turnado [=tornado) wee had last night makes it to stand more in neede of a surveyor then to have the slaves recalled, but being it was your possitive order I have obeyed, and by the returne of these canoes you will receive tbem.83 There is sev[er]all palavers84 between them and the beggarly Natives, I am not able by this to give you a particular accompt, both Mr Layton and myselfe still in the dark. As to Morrells business it will bee very bard to beleive the Blacks reports altogether against a white man. Herewith goe Mr Edwards concernes, which to Mr Laytons & my amazement and mine [sic) falls short of our expectations, considering the inventory taken on the 9th August differing soe much from that of ours. Where the fault lyes I am not able to determine. If I can finde out anything hereafter that will bee for the advantage of the deceased('s) remaines85 shall advise you. I have made use of some things of his, which according to Mr Layton and Doctor Hamiltons valluation amount to one ounce one angle, which I will returne to Cabo Corso as soon as setled, the particulars are expressed in the inclosed note, which I leave to your censure. 86 I find by all hands that the white men have had no pay since their arrivall here. What they are respectively indebted to Mr Smith orMr Edwards their owne books or accompts must make out. Your orders as to this or all other things shall bee punctually observed. If I can but get victualls I shall not doubt my health, but I áam afraid of starveing if my friend to leeward 87 will not afford mee a little helpe of provisions, this place and all about being not worth a herring or two penny chickens. If Mr Salmon can spare any eatables, 88 shall bee extrearnly obliged, for it is a great discouragment to a young factor to bee under such hungry circumstances. Here are severall complaints against one of the Royall Companye s.laves called Abraham in soe much that Captain Dickje threatens to leave the towne if hee stays. I look upon it as onely a fetch89 to have him sent downe, because they are indebted to him, and hee is the only person that knows what is owing to others. I should have given you a larger accompt was I not disordered by the raine that almost drowned mee in my bed last night, and therefore makes bold to referr you to Mr Laytons relation. (PS] I understand Mr Morrell is indebted to Mr Edwards for halfe a say which hee pretends was given him. Your Worships perhaps may find out the truth. 30. Thoma Pilkington Dickis Cove Fort, 25 Nov. 1693 Mine of ye terday date per Mr Layton I confirme, and hope the contents were satysfactory, wee haveing done to the utmost of our power in order thereto. What slave are here, I have set to work to point the walls of this Fort, which work I presume will not bee long in hand. I hope it will in a short tyme uit with your pleasure to remitt mee what slaves fitting for work you can spare, that the battlements may bee raised and the work of the pur90 &c halfe firushed may bee compleated. I hold it needness [=needless] to acquaint you with our want of boards &c., my preilice sors haveing soe often renewed their advices to that purpose, and I hope when supplyes comes from England Wynnebah will not altogether put our nose out of joynt, for I live in hopes one day to see all the Royall Companyes trouble and charge here retaliated. I am bold to give you fresh assurances, I will leave noe tone unrumed. Since Mr Layton's departure [JJ had a very hott pallaver with the Cabbosheer about the customes,91 I alleadged I knew of none nor would admitt of any thing till I had advised your Worships. I perceive Mr Edwards paid none, and therefore it is you and onley you that can determine the justice of their demands, which are to the vallue of six pease. Here was three or four ablelike men slaves, which may come at ozl 8a per head, but they demanding sheets onely for them, but I haveing noe orders from you nor any quantity, and by my observation it not being customary to part with soe currant comoility everywhere, I declining any dealing till I had your orders, which both in this and whatever else will conduce to the advantage of the Royall Company shall be puncmally observed. PS. Pray bee pleased to lett mee have your orders, if any Companyes shipps are heard of to windward, [whether] I may not send their pacquett [ = packet]92 downe to you without adviseing you of such their arrivall first. If it is your pleasure I medle with any slaves,93 bee pleased to Jett me have some irons,94 here being none. Dicl<lesCove Fort, 2 Dec. 1693 31. Thomas Pilkington Before yours of the 30th ultimo came to hands I had strictly examined all things under my charge and found some things omitted which arc particularized in the inclosed note. I suppose your Worshipps are mistaken as to the number of slaves sent downe from here, you mentioning but four and twenty, whereas Mr Laytons note, a coppia whereof I have, takes notice of the names of five and twenty, for I assure you I have but ten remaineing here, whose names you have in the above mentioned inclosed, soe that by examining both together it will bee found who is wanting, if any. I presume it will bee convenient that I have one of the invcntoryes returned to mee, in order to make the due additions. Your pleasure shall bee observed. As (to) your order, I shall forward the building here to the utmost. J have made some progresse already and shall continue doeing. The Cabbosheers are satisfyed with your reply as to customes, but Captain Dickie presses mee to begg a stick of you for him.95 I know not but it may bee deserved in a little tymc, since the report is very fresh here that tl1eir enemyes the Dedoomes (= Adoomes] have received a notable overthrow, 96 and consequently may bee thereby inclined to peace, the effects of which few are ignorant of. I shall observe your orders as to slaves but am affraid nothjng or very little but sheets will go downe. What the whlte men are indebted to Mr Edwards estate you will find in the forementioned note. What of his remainder here herewith is sent down, and if can finde out any thing to the valluc of a taccoe anywayes belonging to rum shall advise & returne it you. Mr Edwards great canoe will not swim without mending, I will goe about it on Munday. The 3d one goes downe herewith, as also his slaves and pawnes particularized in the aforesaid paper. T have noted the price of goods in conformity in my bookc, and observe the white mens sallary per month. Desire your order against next pay day, that I may sett things to rights with them, which I cannot doe without I have an accompt what hath really been paid them already by other hands. Stores omitted in the inventory, vizt 1great shott, 1 old spung [=sponge],97 1 coller [= collar] banctileers [= bandoleer],98 2 crows, J maule, 1 pick-ax[e), a pareell old iron about 28 lb, l roll of sheete lead, eight men, 2 women slaves. 32. Thomas Pilkington Dicl<ies Cove, 16 Dec. 1693 When your of the 11th instant came to hand I was scarce able to read it, being taken on Sunday last with a violent feaver , and what is more to my misfortune the Doctor would do his part, but it seem Cape Coast cannot finde remedyes. I hope I shall doe well againe, since this i the first time I could sitt up to writte. Worthy Sirs, I must tell you the too excessive raines creates all our sickness here, wee haveing not a dry hole to put our beads. What hath been done hitherto to this fort is no better then a cheat, and if you are not pl.eased to send us up some good quantity of lyme and plaster , wee must sitt still and lett this worke m[o]ulder away as oft as each shower raines . When the great canoe bring any lyme &ca bee pleased to lett Mr Edwards panyard 99 woman Maria bee returned, here being a very fine slave kept here to be exchanged for her. [PS] Herewith comes the female lave you wrote for. I hope you will pardon that I doe not answer all particulars. 33. Charles Hamilton Dickies Cove, 21 Dec . 1693 This canoe comes to acquaint you that Mr Pilkington is againe relapsed into his fever, which I am a:ffraid will carry him off. Hee doth already sometymes stammer, othertymes speak nonsense, his fever is very great. If Doctor Hayes could possibly send him up a cordial[ aulep [ = julep] 100 and some conserve made sharpe with spirit of vitriol 1¡ 1 it [ms. 'vitriolist'] would doe him a greate deale of kindness. The canoemen I have sent are those pawned to Mr Edward . I had sent yesterday , but every hour [ of the] day am confined to my pillow with a violent feaver. Let the canoe bee dispatched back. 34. Charles Hamilton Dickies Cove, 27 Dec. 1693 These come to acquaint you of the death of Mr Thomas Pilkingon my Chiefe, hee depatted this life aboute eight of the clock last night, soe according to your order of the 20th in tant have ecw-ed the Royall Companyes concemes, which I have accordingly done and with as much care a if my own. Mr Pilkington his estate was by him elfe at my desire put up in a trunk and chest, which soe soon as hee dyed, in sight of three of the whitemen, [I] seal'd up both. Yett there are several! little th~ngs forgott out, but they shall bee as sure as if they had not. Those things upon him, I had much ado to keepe from the man that shifted him,102 pretending custome, but untill ordered by you will secure them also. Wee are all much out of order with intermitting fevers, but Thomas Plummer and John Bird almost spent with its long continuance, the last of which earnestly desires his removeall to Cabo Corsoe, as if perhapps change of aire might do him any kindness. If I can have Mr Pilkingtons bedding val!ued here, it will doe mee a great kindnesse, for comeing soe suddenly from on board, [I] have been forced ever since to lye upon a bare cott. I have been at some small expenses since his sicknesse, laid out upon necessaries for the house, defraying some charges &ca, soe give it to your consideration as to my satisfaction. What money hee had was in 3 bu1ses103 and put [in] his trunk with other things. Dickies Cove, 3 Jan. 1693/435. Thomas Buckeridge These may advise my arrivaU at Diclcies Cove the Ist instant, where with Mr John Pinck I tooke an exact inventory of the goods, merchandize s, guns, stores, amunition &ca belong[ing] to the Royal Company in this Fort and Factory, which with copia are inclosed. I also to the utmost of my power have examined into the estate of the deceased Mr Thomas Pilkington , and dide find in his trunk (according to certificate of myselfe, ditto Pinck and Mr Charles Hamilton) mk I 2oz 3a 5ta, which again is therein deposited, with addition of 15a ta. due to him from Thomas Alner, 15a !ta from John Story, ozl Oa6ta from Henry Casey, 4a from John Bird, 4a from Thomas Plummer, 7a paid by Doctor Hamilton, and 14a sent by myselfe for one pair of shoes, one silver spoon weighing oz3 and two small sheep valiued at 9a, which sums in total! doth amount unto mkl 6oz ISa., being all I believe due to him in these parts, or that I can at present discover . Thomas Plummer and John Bird being extreamly ill and dubious of their recovery, I earnestly according to their desire entreate leave for sending them to Cabo Corso, and that I may bee supplyed with able men in their rooms, which wee shall much want, the remainder being sickly and capable of little service. I finde this place to bee ev[er]y day decaying for want of workmen and materialls to make a progresse therein. I shall doe my endeavour and hope your assistance will not bee wanting therein. As to the effects of Mr Thomas Edwards I must humbly referr you to my next, then hopeing to satisfie you in the particulars thereof. In the mean tyme must crave a supply of powder, haveing but one barrell, soe damnified it is good for little, also some Negroe irons, without which wee cannott secure any slaves in the Fort. You will receive by the returne of the canoe all the deceased concerns, with two men slaves bought by ditto for accompt of the Royall Company, who have this momeing broake a hoale [=hole] through the prison wall, had gone near to have made their escape, all which refcrr to your consideration. PS. I have per 2 hand canoe sent a man slave to bee exchanged for a woman named Mago which was a pawne of Mr Edwards, desireing shee may come per ditto canoe. [PPS] Since my writing hereof, the Cabbosheers desired mee to keepe one of the slaves abovementioned, that they may exchange him, whereupon have not sent them both ut supra advised . Upon the arrivall of any shipping I desire to know whether I may forward their pacquett by a canoe to Cabo Corsoe. 36. Thomas Buckeridge Dickies Cove, 9 Jan. 1693/4 Yours of the 6th instant with the woman pawned to Mr Edwards and the inventoryes of Dicki.es Cove came to hand, the latter of which, being drawne conformable to order, you will receive per bearer. Neve11helesse I do verily beleive that the Company concemes (in my former) were not at aU undervallued. I notice your pleasure concerning English shipps, and shall take care to gett the sticks for hand spikes in a readiness against arrivall of the Briganteene. 104 Thomas Plummer mentioned in my last to bee very ill departed this life the 7th instant, leaveing lla of gold, and a small bundelJ of old cloths, which have sent by the canoe, the money being inclosed. I hope you will not forgett to supply mee with some whitemen in roome of the deceased and John Bird, whome shalJ send downe by Capt. Bradshaw, the other three remaining being forced the greatest part of the day to keep their beds, soe that should there bee any occation I have not a man fitt for service in the fort. I have sent you the man slave which in my last I mentioned the Cabbosheers have a designe to exchange, and crave your orders for to purchase others, if they shaJ I offer. As to the estate of Mr Edwards I have stopt from the whitemen for his accompt oz3 13a 2ta, with addition of 7 a 2ta, a debt from myselfe, shall send you on order. I enquired of Mr Johnson concemeing a memorandum of debt at Succondee which Mr Edwards left with him, and bee told mee that Cape Coast Toms son Jiveing at Batteroe was indebted to him 12a. Taccabas brothertos did owe him omething, but how much hee could not tell me, for that Mr Edwards on his comeing from Cabo Corsoe tooke the paper from him, and imployed Mr Rives therein. As to the former the Copeman of Butteroe hath panyard him for mee, whose money when I receive shall give you an accompt off, and for the two boys Kinney and Benney released by Mr Pilkington Captain Dickie (as himselfe and the Cabbosheers doe testify) did pay oz2 4a to ditto Pilkington for their re)ea ement. Dickie also promises that that if he cannott gett the boy Will, which run away, to Succondee himselfe by fair meanes, he will paniar some of Occady people on his heade and bring lbem to mee for satisfaction. Hee hath importuned mee for a cane which Mr Pilkington promised you would send him. Alsoe the rest of the Cabbosheers doe expect dasshees for Christmas, wherefore I desire you wil1please to lett me know what customes or dashees these people are allowed, that I may governe myselfe accordingly. Per the Briganteene bee pleased to supply mee with some Guinea cloat(b]s and with powder on accompt of the Royall African Company. If ships arrive l desire to know whether I shall send downe the packett or not. In my last I committed an error in forgetting to send money for Mr Pilkingtons case, which J had taken to myselfe, and did disigne then to bee accomptable for itt. As for pewter I thought it bad been putt in the canoe, but have since is noe more then one small dish, 3 old plates, l tankard and spoone remaining,understood that his boy Jack carried away two plates and a spoon, soe that there which being worth little, Mr Pilkington had them into the bargaine of other things bee bought of Mr Edward[s], wherefore for them and the case have sent inclosed Sa, being what they are worth. As for what goods you doe not finde disposed in bis books, I cannot discover anything of them, wherefore with many thanks for your late favors, I shall conclude. Dickies Cove, 25 Jan. 1693/4 37. Thomas Buckeridge now I received from the This serves to enclose 3 letters 106 which iust [=just] Commander of a Barbadoes interloper named the Supply, who came to an anchor (at Cape Mountserrado) 107 in company with Capt. Shirley in the East India Merchant and Capt. Phillips in the Hannibal], a ship of 36 gunns, where hee left them cutting of new masts, the latter haveing fought a Frenchman of warr (near the Canaryes) of 48 gunns, by wb.ichhee received much damage, as also the other by bad weather. Capt. Richard Bradshaw in the Swallow Briganteene arrived here last night. In your last letter I am ordered to cult a great quantity of timber, which by reason of our carpenters lameness, who hath not been able to stand upon his leggs these IOdayes, as also two more of our slaves, I cannott effect, nevertheless shall send what I can gett ready, and I must needs say Mr Pilkington was very much overseen 108 in chuseing out of 35 slaves which were here such sorry ones for to continue at this factory, two of them being boys and one old fellow of little or noe service, whereas considering the work wee have in hand to finish the fort, as also that of cutting tymber, wee ought to have able slaves, as also a greater number, with more workmen, otherwise I fear wee shall not finish our work before the raines, the floors of all our roomes being yett unlaid, our walls not pointed, our curtaine walls and ports upon our battlements not raised, as also them not tarrased, our hall not covered other then with thatch, besides a small tower (which it will be necessary for us to have) not built, as also several! doors and windows to make, all which shall referr to your consideration what tyme our carpenter and bricklayer with 3 or 4 slaves will bee a finishing, for which wee shall want a great quantity of deels [=deals], with nails, with hinges both for doors and windows; therefore if upon arrival! of the shipps you please to order them to put on shore such d[e]ales and other things as wee want, as also if you would please to spare us the surveyor for two or 3 weeks, with more slaves and workmen, it would mightily forward us, for indeed if the slaves which Mr Pilkington sent downe were here, they would not want irnployment. Whereas you was advised by ditto that hee had furthered the building much, I must needs say it was not true, for there had not beene anything done therein a great while for want of lime and other necessaryes, which now wee have, wee shal I want people. 38. Thomas Buckeridge Di.ckies Cove, 6 Feb. 1693/4 This accompanyes one Peter James, who about 4 days since was discharged the Barbadoes interloper mentioned in my last, and being desirous for goeing for Cabo Corso hath procured his passage in a canoe bound from hence thither, by whom thought proper to advice my receiving from on board the Swallow Briganteene four barrells gunpowder, three hundred Guinea clouts, and forty butts oystershells, with some bricks for covering the Fort. Our carpenter is not yett in a condition to work, and I feare hee will continue soe for a while, wherefore unJesse he amends before the vessell goes from hence, cannot send him on board to ca[u]lk her. Our slaves being few in number, and them none the best, have had work enough, notwithstanding the assistance they have had from the Townes people, in bringing on shore the goods, shells and bricks abovementioned, and it is more then they can doe to bring wood and water to the Fort for our owne use, wood to bume our lyme with, water for mixing it, beside s working it with swish, 109 and makeing it fitt for use, alsoe a great deale of other worke, which they are every day about, wherefore unless you will please to send 6 lusty slaves more to abide here, I can make but very little progress towards finishing our Fort, much more be able to cutt the tymber & wood you expect, for I must needs say there is now almost as much occasion for the slaves you sent for from hence as ever, the country people beeing a rowsawing, 110 and therefore not able to give us that encouragement, it being a great while since they have had anything given them more than a little liquor, which they doe not vallue, wherefore I desire you will please to furnish mee with a piece of red or blew [=blue] cloth that I may give to such as I finde dcserveing and promoters of the Royall Companyes interest. I gave them the answer you wrott mee concerning their customes, with which they were not contented, saying it would be a great charge for them to goe for Cabo Corso, and that you might deferr finishing the Fort as long as you pleased, wherefore if it should bee your pleasure to lett mee know what you thought it necessary to allow them, I could make an agreement (on the Royal Company and your behalfe) injoyning them on such considerations to which services may bee advantageous to ditto Companys interest, and send you, which I beleive might bee very instrumental) in bringing a trade that may help to defray the charges of building This place will also require a linguist who may bee serviceable in procureing trade, which they of Occady and Butteroe 111 are not without, wherefore am apt to bcleive my endeavours to bling some here in little tyme will take effect, provided you will grant your assistance and some thing to send as a dashee to such great men in the country as wee must be beholding to for them. Francis Fitzgera ld hath been here since Sunday was seaven night last,112 but could not hear any news of the shipping, 6 daycs haveing been continu'd soe foggy wee could not see a musquett shon from us. 113 If I had not had the 5 hand canoe of Francks, and the old 7 hand canoe which was Mr Edwards, I should not have gott our things on shore from Capt. Bradshaw, for his men did absolutely refuse bringing them in their boate, neither will they take anything off therein, soe that whatever I send on board must goe of in canoes. PS. If you should want any great canoes, I believe I may sometimes have an opportunity to purchase them, wherefore desire your order and that I may gett one for the use of this Factory. Our flagg is rotten, it will not hoyst the staff, wherefore desire another. Dickies Cove, 27 Feb. 1693/4 39. Thomas Buckeridge This accompanyes Capt. Richard Bradshaw in the Swallow Brigantine, by whome goes the surveyor and John Bird soldier, who through sickness is uncapable of serving the Company at this place, the former of which can give you an accompt of what will bee wanting to finish the building, to whose advice therein I shall refcrr you. By the vessell goes likewise 290 peices for handspikes, 6 slyding pieces, 114 ~nd aboute 9 7 hand canoa loads of firewood, being what I could procure with the small assistance I had, the Company slaves being imployed at home, that Mr Clarkson might give them some instruments and forward us something while hee was here, the canoemen you ordered to cutt wood haveing afterwards but litle time and then not willing to lake the paines, the country being a rowsawing, and indeed unwilling to work any longer for a little liquor, unless the agreement aforementioned were concluded on, and I beleive to have a trade, encouragement must first bee given before wee can receive any. As for a linguister, 1 believe such a person will bee absolutely necessary, upon any palaver whereby the Company interest may bee concerned, [otherwise] my neighbor 115 (who [i.e. the Dutch] have at all their 116 factoryes such & more assistance) will gett the better of mee . You will receive also 50 fathoms 5 inch rope, 170 4 inc h ditto , a parcell of blocks and eyes , 117 some jun ck, 118 an an viii, a pair of smiths bellowes with tooles & bricklayers ditto, some rigging of the sloopes, two sacques [=sacks], two anchors, 119 I windlass. The sailes, haveing in Mr Edwards and Mr Pilkingtons tymes been layed in a place which was not light, they were soe rotten as not to hold the takeing up, where [=were] but as much as will cover my powder, wee have throwne away, as you may bee better satisfyed per bearer, per whome you wiU receive 4oz 4a 6ta, being the estate of Mr Thomas Edwards, according to myne of the 9th last instant, with addition of 4a for his canoe, being what or more then shee was worth, being now not fitt for any service, nobody dareing to venture in her soe farr as the road, wherefore hope you will please to allow another for Factory use. I have also sent 5 musquetts and 1 blunderbuss, 120 which desire you will please to have mended, they being very much out of order, and not fitt for service. The fellow mentioned to bee in irons at Buttero e for 12a oweing to Mr Edward s, 12 1 I have freed to Mr Johnson, who promises to bee accomptable to you for that money. Sirs, both the men you sent up last are violently ill of a fever, in soe much that I fear they will not live, and another of them is uncapable of service, wherefore I desire now you have a supply from Europe 122 you will please to send mee 5 or 6 men more, which will bee as litle as well can bee kept in such a Fort as this, soe fan from magazine [ = med icine] and sickly, also that you will please to send a man capablt: of lookeing after our gunns, and allow of him to bee a Serjeant, which will bee a great security and ease to mee, should I bee taken ill, and indeede this place will require them fan more then Annamaboe or soe much as Accra. 123 Here is a man whose name is Thomas Alner , who hath served the Company eight yeares, being the eldest stander at the place, a civil! person and capable of such preferment. One of the women slaves hath a very ill quality of runing away when there is any worke to doe for her to doe [sic], which in the fonner Chiefs tymc she hath practised, as also twice since my arrival! here, the last [time] shee was 15 dayes before I could hear of her, and at length was taken by some belonging to Mr Johnson at Succondee with 6a charge, wherefore desire another in her room, for shee is not at aJI a fitt woman for the place. I left a coll behinde mee, when I came from Cabo Corso, which I have had since my first comeing in this country, to which I had expended some money in fixing a bedsteade fitt for curtaines which I have now by mee, desireing you will please to send the same up here, [there] not being a cott fitt to lye upon in the fort, they being rotten and tome, soe that without I have one from Cabo Corso (I] shall bee forced to lye upon the ground. 40. Thomas Buckeridge Diclcies Cove, 16 March 1693/4 The occasion hereof is to acquaint you that a little before day break this momeing the greatest part of our easternmost curtaine waU tumbled downe through the excessive raine which fell this night, whi.ch likewise soc much endamaged a flanker adjoyning thereto, that unless there be some speedy remedy the next showre [=shower] if not before it wiU undoubtedly be in the same condition, being already very much settled & crackd from top to bottom. Wherefore desire you would please to send some assistance by first oppertunity, otherwise the raine will very much endanger the whole building, the slaves wee have being not able to performe the fourth part of the worke, which had you supplyed me with when first desired our walls had before now been secured and this mischief prevented. The Castle hath been covered by the surveyour or my predecessor with none other then swish, except some lyme and tarrass that hath been wasted thereon, which notwithstanding [the rain] peirces through, soaks into our walls and cause them to fall, which covering wee are forced to throw off and place bricks in roome, part being already downe, and the rest above soe fast as the worke it occasions can be dispatched. 41. Thomas Buckeridge Dickics Cove, 23 March 1693/4 Yours of the 19th instant, with Edward Littingston Serjeant, Richard Richardson & John Brittain bricklayers, likewise 9 men slaves, I received. Desireing you will please to advise what advance money is allowed the foremost, as alsoe what will be the others pay. I shall hasten the finishment of our breach as fast as I can, the flanker mentioned in my last being come downe, and shall endeavour (according to the little knowledge I have in such affairs) securing ourselves for the future from the like disasters. I suppose the surveyor has acquainted you with what will be required to finish the Fort as to the number of deals, bricks &ca, to which I shall add that if you please to spare 7 chaldron coals I beleive we can in this place make a sufficient quantity of the latter to serve our turne, of which we shall want a great quantity to raise the ports and curtaine walls round our battlements, alsoe to cover some parts of the Castle , which we cannot with our present number, and to finish the spurt [= spur], desiring you will be pleased to send us what sheJl you can, some whereof with little dificulty can procure from Tacaradoe if you please to allow charge of canoe hire, alsoe 12 paire of hinges for doore , 24 pair ditto for windows, some staples , bolts & nailes of all sorts. Sirs, I am continually baited 124 by Captain Dickie & other Cabbosheers for his cane [ms. 'canoe'] and the agrement you promised to make with them, wherefore desire to know your pleasure therein per next. I have sent by the 13 hand canoe 46 knees 125 according to order, and should yesterday have dispatched her had it not been for bad weather. 42. Thomas Buckeridge Dickies Cove , 3 May 1694 By this canoe goes one man slave on accompt of the Royall African Company of England , and is to desire you that you will please to spare mee 3 lb or 4 lb weight of beefe & send per retume thereof , provi ions at this place as yett by reason of the late warrs and present rain being somewhat scarce, unless come, of that here is plenty nough, hould you have occasion, at la. [ var. la] per chest. The breach which was in our curtaine wall i made up. Alsoe our flanker is brought within four foot of it height , and would before now have been finished had not our bricklayers sickness and bad weather, which obliged u rather to secure what was standing than to work upon that which could take noe further harme, prevented u . Sirs, the brick[s] & lyme which came by the Briganteen are near expended, wherefore hall only pre ume to lett you know that we shall yett want a great quantity of each, wherefore supposing the surveyor hath particularized the same unto you I hall not further enlarge . [PS] I desire you w.iLlplea e to send me two chests of sheets, some blue Welch plaines & English woollen carpetts on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. 43. Thomas Buckeridge Diclcies Cove, 10 May 1694 Since my last of the 3d instant our flanker, being raised to the height of its covering, tumbled downe againe, whether through the bricklayer ill carr[y]ing it up or through the excessive raines I .k:nowe not, but notwithstanding they are both very idle & careless , giveing me very much trouble , I am apt to beleive it was occasioned by the latter, it being rai ed ( utable to the rest of our fort) with nothing but swish (except the coynes [=quoins] or corner stones that were layd in morter), which untill it be covered and well pointed will not endure any wctt, soe that unless it be built with lyme we must Jett it alone while (= until] the raines are over, and goe about some other worke. Neverthele sse thought fitt to advise, as alsoe that I have bought a 11 hand canoe for the Companys accompt, desireing to know what I shall doe with her, as alsoe whether you will please to have Quashee putt knees in her here or, when she goes for Cabo Corso, send them to be put in there. By this canoe you will receive a man slave for ditto accompt. LPS]I desire you will please to give me leave to come for Cabo Corso the latter end of the next month in order to make up my accompts. Yesterday in the afternoon passed by this place two Danes Company shipps.126 I have correspondence with a great Cabbosheer to windward of Axim who will furnish me with great canoes, and promises in a little time to send traders, wherefore if you please to allow of something to be given him as a dashee, it will be much to his enco uragement and Tbeleive benefieiall to the Companys interest. Dickies Cove, 20 May 169444. Thoma s Buckeridge This with the 11hand canoe accompany ing a pacquett which yesterday was sent from Cape Trespointas. 127 I may advise my receiving yours of the 141h past taxing me with negligen ce, and that the falling downe of our flankers with other ill convenien[ce] doe ensue thereby, wherein I am very much wronged, as all our people can testifie, for nothing which Jay in my power towards secureing and forwarding the Castle hath been omitted, and it hath been my particular care to cover our walls with thatch, which notwithstanding you blame me about, but since I am oblidged to defend my selfe in your good opinion, I shall declare nothing but what your reason will satisfy you to bee true, that our wall & flankers falling at first, as aJsoe since my last great part of our spurrs & the flanker adjoyning, being well pointed & covered with tarras, hath happened through their ill raiseing with nothing but dirt, which will not bind, and in very great raines as arc usual! here, continuing four or five dayes without cessation, growes naturally damp & slipcry, whereby if one or two stones slide great parte if not the whole wall follows, whereas if that diligence you thinke wanting in mee had been used by others the Castle might have been built with strong mortar and made durable against all weather , by reason of a quantity of shells almost sufficient to have done this worke which I have lately found about 2 miles off, which will cost noe more bringing of them to hand per canoes then than what you pay at Amersa per butt, if you please to order it, which had they been used at first would have saved all this & a great deale more trouble which may happen, al oe the Royall Company a great deale of money. As for the bricklayers whither they doe there worke as they ought to doe, I am not a competent judge, wherefore if anything happens amisse through their ignorance or willfullness it will not be my fault. I wrote of the 23dlast instant 128 that I could procure shells if you would allow the charges of a canoe hire, which you did not answer, wherefore shall make bold to add that if you intend to finish your Fort there most be both workmen and materialls, otherwi e in one or two raine tymes more it will wholy come downe, unlesse you shall bestow a much worke thereon a being imediatley followed would in four or five months tyme finish it, and put a stop to any further trouble, in order to which if it shall be your pleasure I desire you will answer the contents of yours dated the 7th pa t soe soon as you can, sending us the iron worke wrote for, wi h deales, and if you can spare some bricks or coles, otherwise haveing time shall make what shift wee can, but in a little time shall be put to a stand for want of deale . John Storey comes by this conveyance, in whose roome desire another man, and that you will please to lett me come for Cape Coast next month, my left hand being lame, for which shall want the Doctors assistance. 45. Thomas Buckeridge Dicl<ies Cove, 15 June 1694 Yours of the 31st of May came to hand with all therein mentioned, saveing the contract I should make with the Cabbosheers that I did not receive, wherefore desire you to send it per returne of this canoe, and that thereby you will be pleased to furnish me with some money for bearing factory charges, haveing allready disbursed of my owne soe much as conveniently I can. I suppose before now you have been advised what hath happened at Succondee, 129 and hope you will not pass over soe great an injury without satisfaction, which will expose the Royall Companyes concernes, alsoe the Ii ves of their Factors and other servants, to the mercy of the Negroes, or worse of the Dutch, throughout this country. The English have yett friends enough in these parts to punish the insolency of their enemies if you encourage and protect them in time, otherwise thro fear they will be forced to stand for the other party, who allready threatens them. They all looke upon you, & one Cabbosheer of this towne, who hath been most usefull towards building of this Fort, and [whom] Ashrevy hath declared he will destroy, by reason he would not goe nor suffer his people to help him in this warr, 130 will be ready with upwards of 200 fire armes. 131 Here arc others who promise & will take fetishes to doe the like, soe that in a very short time you may have a farr more force than the Dutch, and indeed may have farr more people to take your part, if you will stand by them, than they. Therefore if you please to omitt other means, you may make use of this to be paid for what damage has been done, to serve our neighbours as they have served us, and for the future to secure our interest in this country. Mr Barter, who knows more hereof, can satisfie you further. 132 I shall observe the contents of yours. LPS] I have sent downe 3 unserviceable musketts, and the five we have remaining are much out of order, wherefore desire a supply of new ones and of the necessaries undermentioned: vizt carthriage l=cartridge] paper twine match skinns for spunges half a dozen rammer heads a half houre glass one or two wonning irons threed and scupper nailes a lanthome [= lantern], with a ladle for minion gunns.133 And if you would please to send a sufficient person for a gunner, also some ammurution, swords & collers of bandiliers. We have never a flagg. Plea se not to forgett more deale boards by first oppe rtunit y. Dickes Cove, 21 June 169446. Thomas Buckeridge Yours of the 16th instant by George Clune with the stores therein mentioned, save a lanthome, and the contract came to hand, which upon perusal( I finde not be authe ntick for this place, wherefore desire to know what present payment you are willing to make, there being upon conclusion of that agreement 10 perpetuanoes & 10 plaines, alsoe what ground rent 134 you will allow Captain Dickie, and what dashees of liquor & goods you will pay to the Cabbosheers at danceing time 135 and Christmas, which when I am satisfied in shall draw the contract as much to the advantage of the Companye as I can. There are one or two Cabbosheers of great power in the country adjoyning who are & will stand our friends, who I think fitting to comprehend in the agreement, and if you would please to send me something to give him a cloth, as alsoe allow 4 or 5 every year to be disposed on such as are deserving, it would doe very well and not turne to the Companye loss in the end. Yesterday came a greate canoe with six souldiers, 166 lb beefe, three gallons sweet oyle, 136 6 ditto pease, and. ane anchor[= anker] palme oyle, 137 which doth extreemly encourage Dick.ies Cove people and all which take our parts. Ashrevy I understand hath both declared and taken a fetish he will come here, and on the contrary a.II the people under this Fort have taken feti hes and several} Cabbosheers of great force in the country that they will fight for the English to the last man, whome [= who] if they continue true, as I have all the assurances imaginable, we have twice the force of our enemies, and are able to drive Ashrevy out of this country, without doeing of which [we] must never expect trade or security here. The Brandenburghs have declared for us, panyard several}, and drove the rest our enemies friends out of their country, and have sent me word that upon any warr comeing here they will send both the Cape Trespointas and Occoda men to our assistance. I am very well satisfied the Dutch are the only and sole causers hereof, our enemy being freed by them, 138 fighting under a flagg given by my neighbour Copeman, most of the men raized by him and the Generalls boy with the Companys stick, 139 who[= the Dutch Copeman] hath been an actor through this tragedy, and againe the Companyes goods,140 the jaw bone of Mr Johnson, 141 with some of the Company slaves, lfoguister & Captain of the towne are brought & keept in Butteroe Castle, which if you suffer to pass without satisfaction it will be an etemall shame for us. If you please to send some Cape Coast blacks to head these country people wee may make a de [c]ent into Butteroe Towne, which harbour all our enemies, and panyar Ashreveys wive and severall of his friends, whereby you may regaine Succondee and be paid for all damage , likewise secure our selves for the future without proceeding to fight with him, which if you please with such assistance shall be strong enough to doe. Sirs, in my last I wrote you for money to bear Factory expence, .which upon my word T very much want and cannot make any shift without, haveing been forced to send what little I had to redeem some of our Cabbosheers children which lay in pawne for some moneys they owed the Dutch, who by reason of their takeing our parts threatened to send away their children 142 if not imediately redeemed, which I have done, and hope I have thereby wholly brought over one Cabbosheer mentioned to promise assistance of 200 fire armes to our interest, haveing the same children for my security. Wee shall want some nailes & pitch, with some canvas to make baggs for carthadges. [PS) I wrote you the 10th last instant and thcre[by] sent you a good man, whose receipt you have not advised of. All blacks are madd to have your orders for fighting Ashrevy and gaining satisfaction, otherwise they say they shall be much ashamed. You may use this oppertunity of gaining Commenda.143 Herewith comes 14 g:ranadoe shells. Dickies Cove, 25 June 169447. Thomas Buckeridge lo my last of the 21st past l wrote you severall matters requireing an answer, which haveing not yett received, this comes express therefore, alsoe tO advise by report of some country people fled to Butteroe a great party of the Adooms are come downe into Ancosa country, which is less than a dayes jo urney from these intending to make an attempt on Butteroe Castle in revenge of theparts,144 injury hath been done to Succondee, which they say did belong to them. This hath putt my neighbour into a great fright, in soe much that he keeps at strict watch in his towne and expects a reinforcement of Mine Blacks tomorrow or next day. Now whether the brute [= bruit] 145 of the Adooms be spread abroad purposely by the Dutch for a colourable pretence of raiseing men & gaining more of this country to take their part upon some new dcsigne they may have, I know not. I have this day burnt a killne of 33 butts shells, charges whereof come to la per butt, with which I am againe setting to worke. If our breaches were rebuilt, our hall covered, our tower raised, alsoe our curtaine walls & ports about our battlements, with water, provision & ammunition, we are able to withstand all the Blacks in Guinea, which I hope may be comp leated by Christmas if wee have but your furtherance therein. We want deale boards & nailcs of all sorts with what last wrote for. [PS] Just now came all the Cabbosheers of Diclcies Cove croomes, 146 and have taken fetishes to stand by the EngLi h. Our Gunner had the chance to blow up his hand & face with powder the other day, which is yet something troublesome to him, wherefore desire the Doctor may send us some salves & unguents for wounds or sores if any mischance should happen . Edward Nowell on Saturday morning was surprized with a fitt, and spake not till this afternoon. pitch salves & unguents sbovells nailes a good quantity more bolts for windows and some great ones for doores deale board stock lock 147 & spring locks. alsoe padlocks Richard [i.e. Richard on] the bricklayer hath 7 peeze owing him from Mr Clarkson, which he humbly de ire you will please to receive & secure for him, being absent. 48. Thomas Buckeridge Dick:ies Cove, 3 July 1694 Yours of the 27th last instant I received by return of my canoe and of the 29th by the 11 hand ditto, with tbe neces aries therein mentioned and 11 black souldiers. I am very glad you are reso lved to punish Ashrevy for the villanies he hath committed, which being performed will tume very much both to your owne and the Royall Companyes honour and interest. I could wish you had wrote me to what vallue the dashees you order me to be given should amount to, for my government therein, neverthele hope to give content on both sides. Had I been either to(o] ra h or evere, soe ma[n]y Cabb[oshee]rs and of oe grea t power would not upon my ingle r que t have taken fetishes to defend my self and Corupanyes concerne to the la t man. As you have been pleased to place me in an imploy of ome tru t and creditt my action hall be corre pondent thereto, and tho I may advise of the power I imagine you may gaine in this country to revenge the injury [ which] have been done to u and for the future to bridle the insolency of our enemies, shall doe nothing therein without your positive order therefore, which to execute no danger shall affright me, as being the Companyes servant I hope you will not suffer me to be abused. lnclo ed goes my accomp ts for six months from ultimo December 1693 to ultimo June 1694, ballance amounting to mk.4 7oz 13a !Ota due to factory charges. 148 [PS) When the agreement is concluded shall send you a coppy thereof, alsoc duplicates of my accompts so soon as have time to write them. When any great canoe comes this way please continually to send deale boards in her bottome while we have a sufficient number to worke with. Dickies Cove, 17 July 169449. Thomas Buckeridge With this you will receive the contract [var. 'compact'] made with the people of Dickies Cove, which by reason of my illness hath been deferred soe long. My accompts I suppose you had per last. Ashrevy is againe come to Butteroe , where he hath been a considerable while, the women whereof have every night slipt l= slept) under the Castle walls, and the canoe men gone up the river, 149 while within this day or two, for fear of our attempting to cult them off, some of [the] Cabbosheers have offered themselves to serve you against any enemy whatsoever, and desire they may not be thought backwardly, when they are resolved to follow your orders, either in continueing at home or goeing to fight, and if you were pleased to cause them to attempt something against the Dutch interest it would be a means to make them stand more firmly to us. I beleive if and procured whatyou sent encouragement to Jappo, Ashrevys enemy,150 people you can to joine with him, you might soon have an army to retake Succondee and severely revenge the murther of Mr Johnson, which if you doe not doe and that Blacks perceive you soe little vallue the lives of your Factors, in a short time more it will grow to a common practice and yourselves may not be altogether free. You will never advantage the Company by not punishing the murthercrs of their servants, but day by day you will find their interest decrease thereby. The warrs between the Dankeraes and Awomweyes [continue?], 151 and indeed soe much that some of the former have been downe att Butteroe, one of which came hither and bought what perpetuanoes I had remaining, and told me from the others that there were a great many traders come downe to lmpoho country,' 52 which upon their second returne should be to Dickies Cove, and [would have] been then but for want of (a] way to be cutt through the bushes leading hither, which our Cabbosheers have promised Logoe about on this side if they will doe the like on the other. With the lime l burnt the other day have raised our port walls upon our largest flanker towards the sea, 18 inches thick & 7 foot high, there being five ports, and roome enough for soe many good saker gunns. 153 I am now about our other battery, haveing raized the foundation and laid it anew, and other needfull worke in the Castle . By reasone of this warr with Ashrevy I cannot goe to one of the places where I should have gott shells, and in the other there is not above 40 butts remaining, oe that we shall in a little time be att a stand unless you will be pleased to desire leave from the Brandenburgh Generali for us to goe up the River of Occada , 154 where there are enough, and I am confident upon your request he will lett us take what we shall have occasion for. [PS] On Munday was sevennight last Ashrevy and Finney, two of the Cape Coast men you sent me, without my leave or knowledge tooke a very good large & new canoe which one of this towns people had lately bought for fishing, and went away with her either to Cabo Corso or some other place, the owner whereof makes a great complaint and demands satisfaction. Besides two of the 13 [var. '15'] Blacks you mentioned did not come, which I hope you will not lett cheat you of the money you gave them . Pray send a great canoe witb boards, a lanthome & shovells. 50. Thomas Buckeridge Dick:ies Cove, 31 July 1694 Yours of the 28th instant came timely to hand with advice of Anta Ashrevys 155 intention to surprise this place, which had he endeavoured accordingly I doubt not but should have given him a repulse. I have had severall false allarrnes, and am sensible that he dayly threatens and wants not good will to cutt us off, which makes me keep a good watch and take all the care imaginable, by which means hope to frustrate his designe and turne them to his owne ruine. I believe he has been dealing with some of our Cabbosheers, but I hope to little effect. He i now at Succondee, where yesterday he had a fight with Jappo and some of the Adoomes, of which last night was informed he had the better, causing the fo1mer to cutt his tluoat, which not being yett confirmed I hope is untrue. 156 The Cabbosheer I mentioned to promise assistance of 200 fire armes is Jappoes cozen, who's intere t is consonant with ours and therefore wiU be oblidged to stick to us, Ashrevy wanting to cutt him [m . 'hi '] & all hi relations, soe that if this news be true he will endeavour I believe to raise an army to fight his enemy, upon whose approach to Butteroe [he] ayes he will send for all his friends hither, and put them in armes. Sirs, by reason of this warr cannot gett more shells, for which our work is at a stand, as alsoe want of boards , whjch if we have not to secure our building before the next raines 1 know not what will become thereof. Since my last have been very ill, which occasions me not to send duplicates of my accompts, alsoe want of inck & paper. Last night deceased Richard Barker soldier, his things not being sufficient to pay his debts. Sirs, l forgott in my former letters to advise that upon opening the bale ofplain es three of them were much damaged & wett with salt water & rotten. I received yours of the 19th instant with twenty five blue perpetuanoes and ballance of my accompts. [PS] The Dickies Cove people assisting Ashrevy are not returned, their wives & children flying away so soon as we heard he had. Dickies Cove, 4 Aug. 169451. Thomas Buckeridge This morning the Cape Coast men you sent me being in drinck, & haveing a quarrell with some of the town's people, Quomina, who comes in this canoe, was killed by them, being shott in the groyne [= groin], upon which they all fledd, [with] their wives & children, save Billy, the Cabbosheer aforementioned, and them belonging to him. The occasion was through our souldiers panyaring of two fowles, which being refused by the owner, caused one of them to give him a cutt over the shoulder with his sword, which notwithstanding I sent word I knew nothing thereof, and would cause satisfaction to be given to the person, they were resolved thereupon to ]eave the place, getting together in armes, whereupon sending my people to stop them, and intreat tllem to stay untill they had a right understanding of the matter, they killed the party above mentioned, whose death his companions in the heat of blood revenged on one of them, which is all I know thereof. I am apt to beleive that, notwithstanding their feteeches and fair promises, they have been corrupted by Ashrevy while he was att Butteroe (whose Copemans boy was here just before the mischief happened), and wanted but a plausable pretence to play the rogue. I shall want two chests of sheets, which please to send me. PS. Since writeing hereof I received yours of the zdAugust with the things therein mentioned, save the paper. Jappo is liveing & well att hjs croome, s army, especially Dick:ies Cove men. Ihaveing killed a great many of Ashrevy'can have noe certainty of the news, for the Dutch spread abroad false storyes, and endeavour to conceal the truth as much as they can, only I understand he caught them sleeping before break of day, makeing three attempts on them, whom he drove several I times round the Dutch Fort, which fired att him. I have sent two unserviceable musketts. We have others that looke indifferently weUto the eye, but the screws are worn out. 52. Thomas Buckeridge Diclcies Cove, 11 Aug. 1694 Your of the 6th instant by Cape Coast Tom I received, wherein I find it's myselfe must beare the blame, though others in the fault. It is true I have everaJI time writt you that I had all the assurance could well be require d of the e peoples fidelity to the Engli h, they haveing taken feteeches thereon, and made all the protestations imaginabl e, sufficient to have deceived a more experienced person than I am, notwithstanding all which if they will play the rogue, can I help it? In my last I advised that 2 or 3 of the Cabo Corsoe soldier had a quarrell with a man or two belonging to one of our Cabbosheers about panyareing a fowle, the former thereupon giveing one of the others a small cutt over the shoulder, which I knew nothing of till done , and that I see the people leaving the town, a very ill thing of them after their late pallaver, and positively contrary to one of the articles therein contained, not to make me acquainted therewith, but immediately thereon to leave their habitation. Nevertheless by sending some people to topp & lett them know I was not sensible thereof , but if they were abused would cause satisfact ion to be given them, they stayed a while, when after two or three houres I sent for the Cabbosheer whose man was cutt in order thereto , which he by means of another person (whome I had allway s been very kind to), who is the author of all this stirr, refused and withall sent some of his people away, a thing not su:fferable in these part , to have any person liveing under a Fort not to go thereto when required , without some great reason to the contrary, which observing and heari ng his answer, I sent some slaves to stay them the second time, otherwise to bring him or some of them to the Castle, when againe I see others goeing in like manner, whereupon sent our black soldiers to keep them in, upon which one fellow lay in a bush shott Quomina and all fledd, some through guilt and others through fear. It is a thing common amongst these people to leave their dwellings in a time when they are not afraid of any enemy, haveing done soe both from Butteroe and Occ aday since my being here. You see that wee have the wrong, which the bearer can satisfie you in, the pallave r not concerning me. Some of them will come of their own accord, and beg pardon. You tax me with breach of your orders, which I have always observed. I fear not Ashrevy & all Anta together, the sea being att my command, wherefore since we are amongst an unfaithful] & forsworne people , your orders are very strict for the preserv ation of the fort, whereby I am disabled to disarme or harme such as I find to be our enemies, but must harbor snakes in my own bosome, which, haveing an advantage when they please to give the first blow , may occasion the loss of all I am oblidged to defend the Cornpanys interest, when you are on our enemies side, soe that I fear to doe any thing therefore, and fear not to doe, for if any thing happens amiss, the same must be thrown on me, whereby I may be ruined , upon which consideration, and that you have them more capable to manage this place than myselfe, intending alsoe to goe for England in the next shipping, if you send a person in my roome shall freely resign what you were pleased to bestow upon me. [PS] I have sent my canoe for sheets, and desire to know what shall pay to the Cape Coast men concerning canky money. Please to send inck & paper. I desire to know what advance you allow our Gunner. Diclcies Cove, 30 Aug. 169453. Thomas Buckeridge Yours of the 15th instant came to hand, wherein you say I would not pcrmitt Cape Coast Tom to execute his orders, alsoe that when this difference happened myselfe went armed with my people of the Fort, which if I deny, I hope you will not be angry, neither one nor the other is true, indeed upon consideration that J had not done these people any harme, but that myself had rather the injury, was unwilling by my submission to draw them back, least thereby I might impaire both the Companys & your honour, alsoe encourage them for the future to be guilty of the like. Nevertheless did not hinder your messenger from acting as he pleased, but did allways imagine that, not being sollicited thereto, they would returne of their owne accord, which hath since happened, they being come home begged pardon and promised to deliver up the person that short Quomina. As for my disability to support any trouble may come upon me, I may thanck you therefore, but am not inseoceable what must lye att my doore. Ashrevy with his people have been upwards 10 dayes att Butteroe. By the Fauconberg sent a man slave for accompt of the Royall Company , and desire a chest sheets by returne of this canoe, haveing per last received two ditto. Sirs, my covenanted time with Company being expired the first of Aprill last and haveing some affairs which require my return to England, desire leave to imbarque on board the shipp Fauconberg, Capt. Francis Buttram, in order thereto, which will be esteemed a favour granted. PS.On the 28th instant deceased Samuell Evans soldier, haveing made his will to one of the men here. Dickies Cove, 18Sept. 169454. Thomas Buckeridge This accompanys a man slave for accompt of the Royall African Company of England, and may signifie my receiveing of yours of the 5th instant, with one chest sheets damaged as per inclosed certificate, alsoe my thanckfullne sse for the grant of my request to retume for England by the Fauconberg , Capt. Francis Buttram, in order to which shall write my discharge, till when should not have given you further trouble had not the sale of my basons, the Negroes importunity for more and great appearance of a trade intervened, and is only to desire you will by first opportunity send a supply of the following goods, vizt pewter basons great & small, brass panns, pcrpetuanoes, Welch plaines, sheets, & powder. 55. Richard Goreing Diclaes Cove, 25 Sept. 1694 Yours I have received by the 11 band canoe with goods for accompt of the Royall African Company of England, vizt one hundred three pound pewter basons, one hundred two pound ditto, fifty four pound ditto , three hundred & fifty one pound brass basons, fifty perpetuanoes blue, one hundred & thirty sheets & twenty Welch plaines. Traders being come downe to everall croom , that here being great prospect of a good trade, I wholly referring myself to the bearer Mr Thomas B uckeridge, late Cheif, for tho e goods & necessaries that are wanting in this place, desireing that my wants may be supplied with speed, and you may wholly assure yourselves that it shall be my whole study to promote the Companyes iotere t to the best of my power. 56. Richard Goreing Didoes Cove Forte, 29 157 Sept. 1694 This serving to desier you to send the Royall African Company of England 50 blew perpetuanoes, 20 [var. ' twenty five'] perpetuanoes read [= red], 20 screwed juggs, a cask of knives, tallow, a baile of green Welsh plaines, paper brawls, striped silke, tapsells, pintadoes, with all sortes of great and small beads, for which goods I have sould of tbo e sortes that I had, and for what I wanted as I have above wrote for, the traders haveing money to purcha e, and will be with me a Tuesday next. The traders doe expect a dashee, which I shall ob erve your orders therein, and the Cabbo heer of the towoe [expects] 6 gallons of rumm (var. 'brandy'] at my comeing, for which I desier your orders. They promise great matters, and have sent up the countrey for the traders to come downe, which I have bad every sence I have bin hear [=here]. Plancks, bricks, lime are very much wanted for the securing of the Forte, of what is already built, for that round flanker that fell downe the last raines, sence I came heare hath leaked through, and [is] in great danger of falling. I have caused ilt to be well thathc ed. Heare is likewise great want of lockes and keyes. 57. Richard Goreing Dickies Cove, 11 Oct. 1694 This being my third to you for to desiere of you to send the Royall African Company of England the goods as follows, vizt fivety perpetuanoes blew, twenty five [var. 'twenty'] ditto reed, tweenty screwedjuggs, a cask of knives, a baile of green Welsh plaines, with tallow, paper brawles, tripped silke, tap ells, pintadoes, niconees, alejars, Guiney cloutes if you have any that are small ones. Pray wort hey Sirs, dispacth the cannoe the 1st opportunity , for otherwise I shall loose takeing of money that is in the towne, haveing already disappointed many by long waiteing for the cannoe. Dickis Cove, 12 Oct. 169458. Richard Goreing Yours of the gthinstant I have receved by the 11 band cannoe with the following goods for the accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England, vizt fivety perpetuanoes blew, twenty five reed and twenty five green ditto, tweenty five screwed jugg s, fivety halfe firlcins of tallow, one hundred and eighty seven dozen of knives, 159 lb of severall sortes of beads. Worthey Sirs, you did mistake in sending of the green perpetuanoe s, it was for a baile of green Welsh plaines that wrote for, which I desier you will lett me have by the first opportunity, with the paper brawle s, tapsells broad, striped silke, pintadoes, niconee s, alejars, small Guiney cloutes. You may satisfie your selfes that I will att all times observe your commands, and by what I can learne you are misinformed, for the difference [is) in a great prospect of being at an end with that Ashrewy, for he hath not 20 men, I am very well satisfied, in that ycasterday I gave our Serjant leave to goe and fecth his cloaths the taylor of Butteroe had of his, and when he came there the Castle gates where shutt upp and they had got Ashrewey and where reso lved to make him pay 12 bendyes that he owed or to keep him in irons, but the Cheife took 12 of his wifes with his children and other of his relations till he does pay it, and our Serjant doth say that the Ducth [= Dutch) is very much his enemy and doe say he is a very great rouge. 158 He saw likewise in the Cltiefes roomes Mr Johnsons cane and several! other of his things. Hear is several! of these towne people that doe come to aske leave to settle heare, that have bin at the assisting of Ashrcwey, and all that they can say is that if Mr Buckeridge had not gave them leave they had not wheat, and are willing to take a feet[i)che or anything to come and live heare againe. I have gave some leave to build allready, and desier your orders [var: 'derections'] for the future what J shall doe therein . I never suffer not above six Blacks in at once. I have had twenty at a time but 1gave orders to the Serjant not to let more in and to have all the men with ball ready till they have bin gone, for when there come soc rnaney they se1dome buy, but whant those goods J have not, but when you have sent me those goods that I have wrote for I shall [k]now the reality. The Castell is in butt a very bad condition, that is built with swish, that the raines doe wash it, that mtis contenewly falling. ff you could butt send one hundred butts of shells I will ashure you to secure the Forte from ever falling more. Wee are daily a pointing of it but to noe end, for it washes away one day as wee lay it on the other, that heare is not one dry place in the Forte. As for brick if you will be pleased to be at a small charge I cann supply my wants, haveing one Francis Nixson [var. 'Frank Nickson'] that will burne them. As for plank.es for flowering [= flo01ing] I stand in great need of, and desier you will be pleased to lett me have a flagg, as also swords and belts for the men. [PS] I have not a sheet of paper nor any quills. 59. Richard Goreing Diclcies Cove Forte, 14 Oct. 1694 Just now received the e 3 inclosed letters 159 of the Copeman of Draggo doe's [var. 'Dragode ' '] boy. 160 Not knowing what consequence they may be of thought it convenient to dispacth them by this cannoe, haveing likewi se occasion for a parcell of those beads and the price, being informed will be sought much after by these countrye native s, leaveing the quantity to your judgement, a likewi se if you please to lett me know the p1ice of the other sorte, if I then meet with anyone that will buy a parcell worth my sending for, I shall not otherwaye trouble you. Worthey Sirs, haveing one request , to begg you to lett me have a good Serjant , for this I have is an ill drunken fellow, and one that beare s noe command at all amongst the men, that makes them they are conten.ieully in d1ink this cockroo time 161 and afighting and of a very ill consequence to mee that I must alwayes be troubled to parte them. You may for the better understanding onely inquier of Mr Buckeridge. I have a very honest stoute fellow for a Gunner and that a good ouldier, who was your corperall before he came heather , if you may aprove of him [i.e. as sergeant] and send me [a] Gunner , and shall then live quietly & beare good command in the forte. 60. Richard Goreing Dickies Cove, 22 Oct. 1694 Yours of the 15th [&] 19th in tant [received], by the latter haveing received by the two handed cannoe for the accompt of the Royall African Companey of England three hundred seventy pound of beads. I stand in great need of those goods that I wrote for. I shall use my endeavour in preserveing the Forte. I have heard that you are informed that I have bin at Buttero e, which is very false a God is trew [= true], for I have not bin two stones cast from the forte sence I have bin heare, and a for the mens goeing to the croomes is a false as the other. I doe ashure you that I wiJJ be as wacthfull as lyes in my power and obey your orders in all things . I haveing by this sent you the Serjant and have placed George Clunn in his st[e]ade and Thoma Allenner gunner. The men are in great want of provisions and desier you to spare them some out of the stores, for what they gett is a little fish from Butteroe by one of their boys that they send. Dickies Cove, 30 Oct. 169461. Richard Goring My last to you was of the 22 instant, by which I desired those goods so often wrote for, as now likewise 100 perpetuanoes blue and 130 sheets. This day here came 3 or 4 Blacks to tell me that their master was comeing to trade & did want white blankets and brass kettles great & small, with red correll [=coral]. If you thjnk fitt you may send those things by the canoe, for I want the other goods extrordinary, and hope you will let me have the canoe in 2 or 3 dayes, by which T will send you my accompts. Dickies Cove Forte, 5 Nov. 169462. Richard Goreing Yours of the second I recevied with the following goods for accompt of the Royal African Companey of England, one hundred white blanketts, one hundred blew perpetuanoes, twenty eaight broad tapseils, twenty three broad niconees, one hundred and sixty Guiney stuffs, one hundred and thirty sheets, seventy six ounces of corrall, I haveing sent you rny accompts and ballancc with the great canno. Dickies Cove Factory, 6 Nov. 169463. Richard Gorcing This serves onely to desier [you] to send the Royal African Companey three [or] foure bailes of green plaines, for they are the vendables[t] commodity that you can send, I being daily asked for them, and two or three cases of broad tapeseiles if you have them of this couler, or other wayes you may not send them, for the last where of soe durtye [=dirty] a coler, as likewi se the niconees, that the Blacks would not soe much [as] Jooke upon them, and verry maney of them are much damaged by the fly,162 [and] for want of boards in the bottom of the cannoe are very much weett, I have bin as carefuH in preserving of them as lay in my power butt have not as yett made through [= thoroughly] dry, I doe not question but J shall preserve them. If you will send deale boards in the cannoe I could keep the carpenters att woorke on flowering of the hall and three other roomes, for I cannot keep any goods dry in the warehouse for want of boards. Last night theire came into this road a Pourtigueze, and there being a Ducth galley 163 and a great Ductb shipp likewise, therefore I sent my Gunner on board, that they might not take her in the rood, butt the Ducth galley fiered a shott into my canno, but the canno got on board, with that the galley manned her boats and the second of the Mina came on boards hal[f] an hour after the Gunner and demanded to [know] what he did tbeire, and he told them to keep the vessall from them, with that he bid him be gone or he would send him owt of her presently , that the Gunner came on shore, therefore I could not do anything more therein, thinking it might not be amiss to acquaint you therewith. [PS] 1 haveing thi theft to request your advise in, on Thw-sday the 5th day of November Cape Coa t Thoms son with Ashrewey and two Cape Coast souldier with a slave of Harrie the bomboyes 164 did att 12 a clock att night brook open the doores of one in [=of] the Cabbo heers liveing att the King of Bauduh[s] Croome about 2 mile from the Forte, 165 and presented theire musqet alt the Cabbosheer and the people of the house and demanded his back [=bag], which they presently found and brought away with them. That man and the King came to aquainte me herewith, and I sent for all the Cape Coast souldiers and slaves, that he might see them, and he found onely two of them, that was Harries slave, and (he] confesed before all the Cabbosheers that he was one, and Anshrewey was the other, which is a slave of Hansicoe s of Cape Coast, confesing he was in the house, but they both deny they had any sheer [=share] in the gold or other thing that wa in the bagg, which the Cabbosheer value to be worth 3a, butt they say Cape Coast Toms son hath the bagg and what their [=there] wa . Now this being down [=done] on Thursday night, on Friday morning the great can no whent from hence, and that Cape Coast Tom('s on) in her, and that noebody but Quashe that command the souldiers know as fare as I can learne, and he [=QuasheJ said he [=Tom ' s son] told him he was Yavv y, for all my boy whent in the ame cannoe, yet he did not know that [ms. 'it'] he was in the cannoe tell he came to Shooma, 166 where the cannoemen undcovered [sic] him, and he [ = Quashe] asked how he durst come without my leave , he told him he would returne in my canno, but did not so, but is still at Cape Coa l. The other two I have put in iron untell I have your orders to the contrary . 64. Richard Goreing Dickies Cove, ** Dec. 1694 Yours of the 29th past have recevied, and the Portuguez that the Ducth galley took owt [= out] of my road was to windward of the Forte, that he was better then a leauge from Buttroe when my Gunner wa on board, the Portugueze was within the least gun shott I have, and was coming to an ancor when the Second of the Mina came on boord that was on board the galley came on boord her and threatned to heaive him over boord, that is the Gunner, if he did not quit her, when he his men brought her about and stood off to sea tell he was owl of gunn shott, and the next morning weaighed ancor and stood for the Mina. The great ship with the galley lyes heare still in waite for two more Portugueze that are att the Brand enbo urgh Forte. J haveing receved Cap Coast Toms sons [=son], and havein g examined him before the Cabbosheer, he hath confesed the fact and all that I charged him therewith, as also the other two that was his comrades, this being come to speake with Cape Coast Tom his father and Hansico, one being Hansicoes slaves (=slave], I haveing them all three in irons till returne of this boy with your orders, the Cabbosheers demanding three bendyes, being the custum of the country, as the Cabboshecrs say, I referring myselfe wholly to you in this matter. [PS] I have sent you Aqquba the woman slave by this cannoe. 65. Richard Goreing Dickies Cove, IO Dec. 1694 Yours of the s¥h and 7th instant I recevied, the later with two great cannos layding [= laden] with lime and a silver head ed cane for Captain Dickie. You may be ashured I shall not be wanting in useing my endeavoure to the forwarding of the forte, not doubting but to sccuer ite [= it) before the raines. I have bin very indisposed & for this 14 days of the dry gripes and in great fear of loosein g my left arme, I haveing now by the help of the Brandenbourgh Docter that hath bin with me five or six days much recovered myselfe, but have those paines left in my limbs as l cannot walke the length of my roome as yctt, wherefore I refer sending my accompts this month, and as for ballance that will be none, for its as much as will pay the men, I haveing had very little trade this month , by reason of one parcell of goods I sould in and about the Copeman of Butteroe panyard and made them pay a bendy, and the others the Adoomes made the traders pay such great custum that they they sent me woord that if I could not find some other way they durst [not) venture any more, that I sent to the King of Badow, and the Capushee r and the King hath promised to open the way, that he did send foure men to show them the way, that if once cle[a)red I do not feare of a trade, which the King[s] men and my Capusheer[s) men are all at woorke theire. I desier you to send me those agrements that Mr Buckeridge did make with them Cabbosheers, 167 for my government in this mater, and as to my sending cannoes I never sent one as yet but when I sent for goods, that I charged the Company with. According to yours of the 5th instant I have used my endeavoure to make the theift up with the Cabbosheers, haveing with a great deale of trouble brought itt to a conclution that the Cabbosheer is to have two bendys, he havein g sent this cannoe againe for to bring the an wer, I desier of you to send me woord. Ife you do not aprove of what is done here I may take my mesures, for the Cabosher i resolved to goe his way and to panyare to the valew of three bendys and six peize ife you do not agree to what I have wrote and to lett him have his money att the returne of the cannoe. As to the Cape Coast souldiers you may withdrnw them when you shall think convenient, for I will ashure you need noe way doubt of my tiedillity both to the Company intr a t and the respects I ow unto you. I woold no ways desier of you to withdraw them iff I did not noe [ = know] my elfe to be in safety to the full as I now am. You alsoe requiered search might be made for those things, but Cape Coast Tom sons disposed of them at Cape Coa t: Theire where three traders comeing to the Forte with sixty bendys, but the Adoomes toped them and forced them to goe to the Brandenbourgh .168 I have sent you 12 angles due from John Dobsons as by advise from John Woodburne . 66. Richard Goreing Dickies Cove Forte, 21 Dec. 1694 Yours of the 15 instant I have recevied, and accordingly have called my Cabbosheers togeather to lesson [ = le sen] the paUaver, butt I can not gitt them to hear of anything bated of two bendys, the Cabbosheer ofering to take a fet[i]che if [=whether] his lo s was above a bendy. Consedering all things his demands are very rea onable, he demands Cape Coast Tom['s on) and Hansicoes slave from me, which I have in irons, theirefore I desier your possitive order weather I may end them up with the other ouldiers. Wee have made the lyme goe as fare as wee could in securing the Forte, and hope you will Jett me have more, for the Forte stands in great want till, and all girders and joyces [=joists] ready. I de ier you to send the Royall Companey two cheast of sheets, a cask of 1 lb brass panns and one hundred weaight of 3 sorts of beads somthing smaller then these. Pray dispacth the cano to away the first opportunity, for traders stay in the towne for these goods. I am. verry weak and am troubled with the grovell [ = gravel] and a swelling in my belly, I cannot tell weather I hall live. [By] this canno therefore I desier of you to send me a Docter tell I have recovered, for I am in that paine day and night that is impossible I can remaine soe long. 67. Richard Goreing Dickies Cove, 9 Jan. 1694 [= 1695) This serves to advise of the arrivall of the John Boneventer, Capt. Zebbelt Commander, tomorrow morning you will receive the letter 169 and the souJders. I thanck God Tam more recovered of my ileness and shall return the Docter in a few days, and hope you will not forgitt to send me foure chest of sheets per the first convenienc[y], as also nessareye[s) for the finnishing of the Forte. The Captain gives you his service. Dickies Cove, 21 Jan. 1694/568. Richard Goreing This with my November and December accompts, and to advise you that I have sent you the said 10 Cape Coast Castle solders per Capt. Piles in the Guiney Galley, and have made the palaver up with the Cabosheer for 3oz, 2oz I shall stopp in my next accompt. [As) for Cape Co[a]st Tom[s) son and Hansicoes slaves [they are) dead, & Sir, J am not littell troubled att the ill news I have heard you have lost your brother Mr Joshua Platt, whose death 1 verry much lament. 170 I am indebted to him one marque of gold that I borrowed of him sence J came heather, for which he hath a note from under my hand , which I shall pay when you demand i tt. [PS) This day I am informed by a 2 hand cannoe that came from Cape Trees Pointus that there is a Companeys shipp wooding and watering at Sisters,171 of great burden. Dickis Cove Fort, 30 Jan. 1694/569. Richard Goreing Yours of the 26th instant [received), wherein I am very much consemed that you should charge me with ile actions. As to this matter, I can when ever occasion serves answer to any that shall call me to an accompt for any misdemeanour I have done eather to the Companey or your honours, and as to what you desiered to know conseming the slaves defferance, that I am very ignorant thereof, for I never ever saw or heard of any deffe[rance] that ever where amongst them, butt a great deale of friendship, and (they) does as much woorke as for there number as any one (=on) the Coast, and [as] to any palaver that any one of them had I never heard of nore lifted my band up against them sence I came. Therefore, worthey Sirs, if you doe not think me capable of management of this post nor of the Companys service, I shall be very willing to retume from whence I came, or serve you in any other place you may think I can content you, or othexwayes I shall be very uneasssie, for its the onely thing I desier to Live under what government soever, and to further conformation conseming the slaves [it] is not soe long sence Capt. Piles and Doctor Jayton's [= Jackson) whent from hence, which please to inforrne yourselfe of them. I have here sent one Richard Richa[rd]son , haveiog some small matter f[o]r to settele [= settleJ with the Captain, and pray informe yourselfe of him, or else I will send Harrey the Bomboy if you please or any slave. Captain Dicke desier you to send him 3 yards of scarlett cloath dew [= due] to him sence Christma ', & I desier you to send by the next cannoe the woman slave I sent, or any other, for this I have has a woorme, that she cannot goe, and to that palaver I made for Cape Cost Tom and Hansicoe, I wrote you formerly that Cape Cost Tom son and Hansicoes [slave] and a son of Henery the Bumboys where all three equally consemed in the robberey. I charge you two oz and Harry the Bumboy one. [PS] This serves to acquaint you that as Quashe the carp nter haveing been sick for week he asked me leave to goe to Cape Coast Castle, that I told him it did not lye in my power to give leave till I had informed you[r] worships. Last night he took hi canno and whent away in the night and took Quoruinonoe the Companey slave with him , that is his son as he saith. 70. Richard Goring Dickiescove, 16 Feb. 1694/5 According to your of received the 15th instant, I have sent to Commenda my white bricklayer one John Britton and Iankey the Black , 172 & hopeing you will excuse my negligence for this reason, my canoe that was last with you baveing the bad fortin [=fortune] to sp[l]itt in th ea, & my canoe men in danger of looseing their lives before they could gett to land, that they were forced to come from beyond Commenda by land, that I received yours dated the 4th instant but [= only] the 13th,& haveing sent my canoe men to buy me a canoe they are not as yet returned , and here is not a canoe to be had here for mony, and as to my not adviseing you of the English interloper that was here last, I did not know that it was your desire to give me that liberty, for you formerly cheidd [ = chided] me for putting the Company to the charge of canoes , but you may be assured I shall be rnindfull not to neglect any of your commands . Thi morning saiJd out of this roade for Comenda a New England Briga[n]tine with provision for the Coast (viz) bread, flower, butter, pork & Barbadoes rumrn, with one pipe of Mendera [= Madeira] wine, and a Dutch interloper of 30 guns. For the want of collours to the fort al 1 ships saile by, that I am fore' d to send to B uttroe to hire a canoe to be inform'd, that if you will be pleased but to lett me have a flagg you will verry much obbdge [me]. 71. George Clunn Dickies Cove , 15 March 1694/5 Yesterday morning about nine a cloack my master 173 was taken verry ill with a violent fitt, which has continued all night and this morning , in so much that he has been speechless & senseless ever since, so hoping your worships would be pleased to send some body up here to take care of the fort, and in the mean while I will do my utmost endeavour to keep all things safe & secure & in good order. [PSJ Wee all hope your Worsh.ips will be pleased to consider us this rain tyme about provisions, which is verry scarce already, in so much that we cannot get a so hopeing your Worships would be tacco's worth offis h in one weak [=week}, pleased to releive our necessities in this sad condition. Dickie s Cove Fort, 16 April 1695 72. John Pinck This serves onJy to inform you that Mr Jordan174 has been ever since his arrivall at this place extrearnJy ill of the flux, feavour, stone & gripes, so that have done but verry little bussiness since wee have been here, by reason he has been forc'd to keep his bead [= bed] all th.is time , therfore I send this to know your further order s, there apearing as yet noe signe of his amendme nt, as likewise by the importunity of the soldiers, who have been dayly at me to wright for provition s, for they are ready to starve, haveing neither corne or any thing else to subsist on. They doe humbly desire that you would be pleased to Jett them have their pay for the last two months, Mr Goreing dying before pay day. Here is a Cabbosheer by name Cakonoko who has panjard two of the Company slaves and keep them at his croome, they say it is on Harr y the bomboyes head, when I am better sattisified shal I informe you att length. PS. There is an English interloper att Cape Trespointas who reports that Queen Mary is dead. 175 Pray send some paper. Dickies Cove, 19 April 1695 73. John Pinck By the hands of Mr Barter l received yours of the 18th instant & according to wareho use & Mr Goring['s] concerns,order s have inventoryd the Company's which you will receive from said Barter. I would have sent two inventorys of Mr Gorings concerns by this conveyance, but had not tyme, shall not fayle to send one per next. Here is a boy which was Mr Gorings slave, soe if you please to lett me have him fl] shall give a women slave for him, which Mr Rootsey has in his hand s.176 Mr Jordan is soe bad that he dares not venture downe in the canoe. Dickies Cove Fort, 24 April 1695 74. John Pinck This serves to advise you that on the 22dinstant Mr Jorda n went on board of an interloper called the Advenmre in order for to take his passage in her to Cabo Corsoe, and this instant arrived here Mr Jennings ,177 upon which we sent a canoe aboard to know whether he[= Jordan] was able to come back to assist at the inventoring the Companys concerns , and by retume of said canoe had advise that this morning four of the cloacke he depa1ted this life, and that the Captain had according to custome in such accidents buryed him in the sea. He carried with him in one of Mr Gorings small truncks some cloath , one ounce gold , and one of Mr Gorings shirts, of which we have noe accompt from the Captain , soe desire you will be pleased when the said Captain comes to lea ward to require an f hi 178accompt o m. PS. The Dutch Galley has had a fight on Sunday last with a ship which i supposed to be a French man off of Buttroe . Mr Jennings being somewhat indisposed with stone, can give you at present no accompt of hi.s proceedings, but by the next opportunity wiU not faile. 75. John Pinck Dicl<ies Cove Fort , 24 April 1695 By Mr Jennings have received the orders, and am sorry should doe any thing to displeasure you. I have with Mr Jordan deseased taken an inventory , and have put in every thing I could see or find belonging to the Royall Company, and I cannot tell how those things should be wanting which you say are , by compareing the inventory and accompt together. I hope you doe not impute those things to me, you verry well knowing that I could not by putting more or less gain any proffitt to myself , when I was to returne and the deceased to stay. As for my hindering Edward Barter from inventory[ i]ng contrary to orders received, it i notoriously fal e in him to say soe, I only telling him that to show [how] great he had streatched his orders, however he was only ordered to proceed, and to begin whatt he had done before , but if he would take the trouble the goods were all there, and [I] proferred him the key of the other warehouse. My actions , Sirs , are soe cleare and ju t that I care not what eye inspects into them. As for the screw'd juggs it was a mistake by Edward Barters impo1tunity to begone thatt they were putt downe a[s] half damadged. As for the extravagant damadges you mention, I wish Mr Jennings doe not find them more. As for the tallow, it was rated by Mr Edward Barter. Sirs , I am verry sorry that I cannot be employed upon any bu siness, but that by the information of my ill willers I must (without being heard in my owne defence) be counted a rogue. If you will be pleased to putt me in place 179 shall be verry thankfull and show by my diligence the interest I take in pleasureing my masters whose servant I am; if otherwise, desire you will be pleased to lett the accompts between the Company and myself be made up, and that I may take my passadge for Europe in Capt. Piles, my time being expired. 76. John Pinck Diclcies Cove Fort, 8 May 1695 This serves only to advise you that the canoe I sent to informe you of the death of Mr Jordan is in her retume hither piniard per Anta Shrevey, upon no other accompt then that Taggee has beat the Cufferoes, 180 neither wiII he release the men or send the letter, wherfore have thought it convenient to advise you. The Dutch have a great many irons in the fire, & this place is a great eye sore to them and would faine remove out of their way, though itt were after Sucundee fashion, 181 & in case Anta Shrevy should come against us, we are verry ill provided of every thing, haveing neither come nor water Losubsist on, therfore humbly desire you will be soe kind as to assist us with prov itions &ca. All the men are downe of distemper, so that there is not four man in the fort that are able to stand on their leggs, and the fort if not better remedied will on a short time fall about our ears. Mr Jenings has been ill of the stone & feavour ever since he have been here, so desireing you will be pleased to dispatch the canoe with speed, as likwise to send your former orders by her. 77. Richard Jenings Dickies Cove, 14 May 1695 Since my arrival! I have been much aflicted with the stone & still continues. As did advise your Worships in a letter of the death of Mr Jordan, Mr Pinck & self have taken inventory what belonging to the Royall African Company & of Gorings estate, the which I here inclosed send your Worships, also what papers I have found. As for the perpetuanoes that are wanting, Peter, a Black in the towne, declares he brought traders some small time before Mr Goreing deceased that bought seventy, and the said Goring gave him a niconee & the trader a carpet to encourage them, & Francis Nixson declares that he saw thirty perpetuanoes deliver'd, & Mr Goring should say that was the remaincs of the blue perpetuanoes. One lead barr he cutt into sluggs & gave the blacks with powder to burne Canconnock[s] croomc. 182 One half firking tallow he sold Peter, it being damaged, for 2a 6ta. I have examined the Serjeant & the men, who will all declare upon oath not the least thing of the Company has been deliver'd out of the warehouse from the death of said Goring till Mr Jordan & Mr Pinck came. I should have sent the serjeant downe, but he is troubled with a violent feavour & ague, & his leggs so swelled that he is scarce able to goe, and roost of the men downe with other distempers, & provision so carce that they are ready to starve. As to the Serjeant[s] paper [it] was a coppy taken from said Goring, & [he] further declare he did not know what good was in the warehou e. As for the difference in the inventory , Mr John Pinck has disposed of some goods which he will give your worships accompt. I have further inquired after Mr Gorings estate, & am inform'd he sent two canoes with perpetuanoes to Cabo Corso Castle and consign'd them to the French Doctor,183 they were bought out of the interloper. Mr Goring was to pay 8mk , the French Doctor the ballance, the whole amounting to 15mks, but what returns was made I cannot learn. Further he laid out with the interloper 11oz in Cabe de Verde cloaths. 184 What I have write concerning the Royall African Company & said Goring in the foregoing part of this letter is the best information I can give at present. Here are several) palavers about Harry the Bomboy, and the people are oe di attisfied with him that they are re olved never to bring trade to the fort till he is remov'd, soe shall keep him till further orders. The reason detaining the canoe so long was by sea being soe bad that noe canoe could goe off. When the seas being abated, intending to forward the canoe, [I] had information the Mine did panjard all the canoes that was belonging to Cabo Cor o Castle .185 The reason which gave me to suspect it [was that] the canoe we sent to advise your Worships of the death of Mr Jordan is not returned. I have received yours of the 3dof May, & accordingly have sent away the five hand canoe with John Pinck. We have had for these eight days last past such violent rains that one of the flanckers is downe, & the rest I believe will falow [= follow] if the rain hold. The reason that I have not sent anything that belong to Mr Goring is because they will take damage, so shall referr it till forther orders. J humbly desire your Worships for God sake to send another person to take care of the Companys concern , that I may come to Cabo Corso and not lye & perish here, for there is noe sustanance to be had. Being forced by my sickness to omitt severall things, shall referr you Lo the bearer. PS. By the canoe comes two slave & a pawne for six angles. 78. Richard Jenings Dickies Cove, 31 May 1695 My la twas on 14th instant , wherein I gave you an accompt what condition the Fort was in, but have not heard from you. These are further to acquaint you in what condition we are in by the violent rains, who have scarce pleace to keep the Company goods nor the men to lye dry. There is lwo flankers already downe, expecting every minuett when the others will fall, if the rains should continue. The men are in great want of their pay. I have not any mony, therfore I would desire your worships for to take some speedy care or they must starve, for the natives will not give them cred.itt no longer. Captain Dick makes much complaint for rent, he says he hath a twelve month due. I continue verry ill of my distempers. I humbly begg of your worships for God sake that to take care of theyou would be pleased to send some other person Companys goods, and I may come downe to Cabo Corso Castle for recovery of my health & not perrish for want of releife. Worthy Sirs,[ms. 'rerevery'] if l have not got your conse nt I must come away without, but I hope you have Christ ianity in you and will consider my condition God knows is verry bad, that so I may have your worships consent. As to the trade l think it is no great matter where there is any body there or no, for I shall not take what wiII defray charges. PS. A list of the mens mony & what pay they have per month. Dickies Cove, 12 June 169579. John Pinck This accompanys Mr Jellings, by whom according to order you will receive two inventorys signed by us both. The fort is ven-y much out of repair, two of the flankers are downe , & part of the curtain wall, & the rest if the rains hold longer will be about our ears. I humbly desire as soon as possible you can to let the surveyor come to view it, & send up some workman, I shall gett whatt rnatcriall I can in areadiness for them. I do designe God willing to gctt another clamp of bricks made & burnt. Francis Nixson, whoe setts the clamp, desires to know what you will be pleased to alJow him for his pains. 1shall use my endeavours to gett what oysters shells I can to make lime, that nothing may be wanting when the workmen come. I can not at present info1m you of any news in these parts, save that the canoemen that Anta Sherevy panyard he has been about of ships to sell him, but no body will buy him. I shall have a watchfull eye over Anta Shrevy & his actions, and as I hear further shall advise you. I desire you will please to send per first oppor tunity six chests sheets and some blue perpetuanoes if any to spare. I humble desire you will be pleased to send us up some provitions, or else we must starve, here being nothing to be gott for love or money, the people them selves being ready to devour one another. I give you my harty thanks for placeing me here, & hope by my deligence in the Company's service to merritt your further favours. The slaves Conconoko had seized on have made their escape, so that I find none wanting save Quomanay. I humbly beg if possible that you send up some body in quality of a Doctor, that can bleed & admin ister physick, for most of the people arc ill. Hopeing you'! conside r our necessitys, and send what desired. 80. John Pi nck Diclcies Cove, 15 June 1695 This come express to de ire the sheet & perpetuanoes before wrote for, people being here with their money waiteing for them . By this canoe come John Dobson soldi r in a verry bad condition, that had he stay'd here would certainly have peri hed. I humbly crave your pardon for ending him downe without your orders, so desire another in his roome. By thi canoe comes five old musquett not servicable , so desire others for them. By this come three bricks moulds , to desire you'l be pleased to send up in their rooms five new ones, & 6 plains [=planes] for bricks. At the foot hereof is an accompt of gunners stores wanting . PS. Gunners stores: flint [ms 'tlints'], tar & bru hes, cartridge paper, needle , th.reed & twine, skins, canvas, trucks,186 a pack needles, nails of [all] sort[s]. 81. John Pinck Diclcies Cove Fort , 2 July 1695 Yours of the 21 pa t I received , with the things therein mention'd. I am verry sorry that I should put the Company to any unnecessary charge. All the Mine canoes [that] comes to thi place informed me that the palaver was made up, & 187that all was quiet of both sides . The perpetuano that Mr Jenings has overcharged, he may thank him self for it, being his fault. I thought he had given you the inventorys when he [ms. 'l'] came to Cabo Corso, for I wrote two which were signed by us both . If you pl[e]ase to trouble your self you may find the other among his papers. I should for all that have sent another but have no paper to write one on, this being all I have, o desire you'l be plase'd to end to me some with some quils per retume of [t]his. The occasion of my sending this is to complain of the rougery of these people, especially of Captain Need, he being so great a rougee that there is no liveing for him , he haveing desarted the towne some time agoe upon some discontent between the Cabbosheers and him elf, & haveing gott others to doe the like, keeps hi habi.tation about 3 miles off, where by his rougery he not only hinders trnders but paniar all he can gett. Two or three days agoe, he & the re t sent to me, pleading they were Diclcies Cove people, & desireing they rnig[h]t live in the towne, & that I would end my boy to a ure them no body should hurt them. I haveing at that time occasion for oyle for the forts use, sent my boy to assure them that if they would live peaceable no body should hurt them. As soon as Need had my boy he panyard him, & bid s defiance to the King of Aguaffo & all that can assist the Englisch. 188 He has him there now , & says he'l keep him till [the] King off Aguaffo comes to redeem him . He is a great rouge & may work much upon the re t, & doe us a mischeif. They all acknowledge, though the fort be downe, they can't hurt it, but they will starve us out and keep us from water . There is 3 French ships to windward, & one past by the 27th last, who tooke an Englisch ship of 28 gunns at Gambo, with 400 negroes of the Companys. 189 Dicl<ies Cove Fort, 7 July 169582. John Pinck Yours of the 4th instant have received, & observe your advise concerning the differances of this people. I did what I could to have all qui[e)ted before I advised you of it. I sent a slave for water which he [=Captain Ned) has panyard alsoe, so that if they hinder us from water cannot tell what to doe. I have placed a baJTells of Mr Gorings powder to the Companys accompt. The Copeman of Accoda advised me of the French ship to windeward, and the other Tomas Allner was aboa rd on, she being at anchor of this place, and bought the English Captains coate he was kill'd in. The French vessell is a galley of 18 oars & thirty eight gunns and one hundred and seventy men; her name is the Garden, she came here to loock for the Windhound, 190 or any other vessell she can light on. The Captain own'd of three more vessall but could not tell whether they were [ms. 'more') gone downe or no. J shall not fayle to be as carefull of the fort & Companys concerns as lies in my power. I should be verry glad if Taggee were in these parts to bring these people a Little more to reaso n and honesty, for of a small company there cannot be greather rogues under the sunne. Please to send when the flagg comes a pair ofhalliards (= halyards] 191 with it, for here is none. Dickies Cove Fort, 20 July 169583. John Pinck Yours of the 9th instant I received, & have with much adoe made up the palaver & hope all things are now in peace & quietness. They have so orderd the bussiness that it-is all laid on HaJTYthe bomboys head, whom they have prended 192 4oz Sas, Nedd a!Jedging that he took his brother out of his grave, with his gold & what other theings he had in with him, which he makeing appear before all the Cabbos heers they have ordered him to pay the above said sume, which Twas forced to pay in goods before I could get either boy or slaves from their croome. The reason of the canoes so long stay is itt being their Cluistmas time, they would not go about till now their danceing is over. 193 Captai n Dick demands for custome at aid time one green perpetuano , & eight gallon rum as all custome at a new Cheifs settling, which he say my predecessors have alwais paid him , which if so please to advi e me. I hope the musketts are mended before thi time, o desire you'! plea e to send them. You order me to buy canoe , & I do not know what good to pay for them. I am enformed of a 11 hand canoe to be sold, & on Munday expect her here to view her. I am forced to tome away traders because I have no goods to sell them , so desire you to send up per fast opportunity what sheets you have to spare, two, three & four pound pewter basons of each sort a hundred, alsoe what powder you can spare, as also the workmen for I am ready for them. I know not what I shall doe with the whitemen, they not haveing their pay can gett nothing to eat, & these people's faith extend no further than ready [money], so humble de ire you ' ! end mony to pay them by first opportunjty; also to send a doctor with medicines and salves to look after our people 's !eggs & other deseases. If they are not looked after they wiU drop off, or else must send them downe to Cabo Cor o & so di able ourselves. I hope you'! be pleased to allow me some expence of lyquor, which I have expended at makeing upp the palaver. I am verry much in want of a good loke [= Lock] for the warehouse, this that is on being quite poiled , o that I am forced to putt a small padlock on, which ignifies no more then if there were none. Plea e to take notice that Mr Jenning received on Mr Gorings accompt from Captain Billy 7a, & Braffo 194 6a 6ta. We shall be verry much necess[it]ated for two boyes in the makeing of the bricks, so desire you' 1 please to send back Quomin & another boy. If you can spare me the 8 mark pile of weights 195 which did formerly belong to Annashan, 196 they would be a great help to me, here not being one pile fitting to recieve or pay mony by in the fort. Plea e to send to me bolts & tapIes for windows, also as good pair of stilliards [= steelyards] 197 to weight the bras by, these we have here being good for nothing . PS. When you send the canoe please to order her to take in my thing , beirlg much necessitated for my lining [=linen] . 84. John Pinck Dicl<ies Cove , 25 July 1695 Yours of the 23d in tant received, & observed the contents there of, and doe find that I am accused for extorting mony from the natives , & useing other mean [ms. 'maens'] prejudiciall to the Companys concerns in this place, all which I utterly disown , and think it verry hard that you should be against that which all the Cabbosheers both of this place, Cape Tres Pointas & Butteroe thought to be to little a satisfaction for Nedds panyaring my boy, & keeping him three weaks fast nailed to a blo[c)k & almost starved, for p,allavers which were long before my time. I might then well make myself a party when the affront was put on me. As for following [ms. 'fallowing' ) Mr Johnson,s courses, 198 I disown them and regard my owne sefety more, not designeing to loose my life & ruin my security upon such trifle pallavers, though if occasion were (which God forbid) should as willingly loose my blood in their service as any other of the Companys servants. The ounce I am not as yet paid, neither was it given to me, but [to] the boy & slave who were sufferers. I acknowledge that I did fire att canoes in the bay, but they did not belong to this place, butt were Mine canoes, that buy up all the come before it is fitting to take in, & we all ready to starve for want of bread, being forced for six small cankys a day to pay six angles the two months, & it cannot be expected that 285 lb beafe can last for ever. Their oyle or fowles they will not sell to us, but the Mina canoes may buy them under rate. In short, they would be rogues, if they had witt enough, & their designe [ms. 'desinge') I believe is to starve us. I have by me twenty butts oyster shells, & wood within a small matter to burn a kill of 50000 bricks, & should have been much forwarder if these people would have given their assistance as they ought to have done. The custome in palavers you mention the Dutch use, 199 it was also used att this place but never brought up by me, but it being your order to the contrary shall most strick.ly observe, & for the future, unless it co ncerns my masters intrest, shall on no terms whatsoever concern my self in any of their palavers, but leave them to their owne laws & customes. I had not concerned myself in this, but you ordered me to be assisting to Hucame, 200 and he being such an old foo l, they would never have done it if I had not gone, so that my goeing was in obedient to your orders. The report goes in these parts, that the Copeman of Butteroe has order to raise what force he can in these parts to oppose John Cabess & Taggee, 201 the former of which we hear the Dutch Copeman of Commenda had wounded. 202 As I hear further of anything of consequence shall advise you. I have not a coppy of the articles of agreement by me & to the best of my remembrance never see the originall but once, so by retume of this canoe desire a coppy, also another man in the roome of William Phillips, whom 1 am forcedto send downe by reason of his !eggs. I have paid him his six months pay. 85. John Pinck Diclcies Cove Fort, 12 Sept. 1695Yours 1 received. This comes to desire on accompt of the Royall AfricanCompany of Engeland,203 one hundred 4 lb, 3 lb, & 2 lb pewter basons to be sentas soon as business will permitt, the traders staying for them. The mony Iformerly advised you Mr Jennings received from Captain Billy & Braffo he isstill indepted to Mr Goring, that not being included in my receipt. You willUkewise receive an accompt of what things rhave of his. As for an accompt ofhis debts I have none, Mr Jening[s] carrying to Cabo Corso, so desire theworkman of. It is likewise of the articles of aggreemcnt for this place. I hope bythis time the platforme may be done at Cabo Corso, so desire the worckmen maybe sent, I haveing in readiness burnt fifty thousand bricks & upwards of fiftybutts of shells which I am unwilling to burne before l see the workmen. Theslaves we have most of them being lame is the reason we goe so slo[wjly towork with the bricks, but if you please to spare me a dosen or a halfe more ofslaves, I dare promise not only to build that which is downe with good brick, but[to] new case the rest of the fort, which will preserve it mightily from the rains.Herc is no news stirring in these parts, nor any schips to windward. When theworkmen come please to send some cordages 204 for the scaffolds, as alsoQuashee the carpenter. 86. John Pinck Dickies Cove, 18 Sept. 1695 Yours of the 14th instant I received, with Serjeant Nathan Lathom, in whoseroome according to order have sent downe Serjeant Clunn, [with whom also]2¡5Thomas Alner & Francis Nixon. The 2. lb basons shall sell according to order.Per next pray advise the mens pay you now have sent upp, and likewise sendfour quarter cask tarras, a carpenter & a saw for the sawyers use, as also the nailsformerly wrote for. There are several! other neccssarys wanting which myindisposition hinders me from writing, but when 1 am better shall further advise. 87. John Pinck Dickies Cove, 20 Sept. 1695I hope you have had before now mine of the 18th past. This comes expres forthree cask knives & five or six hundred brass panns, which desire you') please to send with speed, and any other goods you have vendable, as green & red perpetuanoes not dam aged, these few I have by me being damaged they will not sell so well. I hope whe [=we] shall in a short time gett this place in a posture of defence. In order thereto, your worships know building in this country cannot be carrycd on without expcnce of lyquor , and you alone being the onely judges thereof, I humbly tender Loyour consideration, for our slaves being so few [we) must of necessity use the assistance of the natives, and if you please to send the other sawyer with the slaves and a carpenter, I will not trouble you for a deale board or any thing else this country affords. The surveyou r desires six women slaves may be sent up, for he shall mightily stand in need of them in working about the fort and carry ing lime & swish. PS. Pray send the nails fonnerly wrote for, with bolts & staples for the windows, with four hundred large spikes. Dickies Cove , 11 Ocl. 169588. John Pinck By this canoe comes the quarter cask of wine, thinking you might be in want of it have sent it downe. l should have sent it downe before but that I only waited for the great canoe . I could neither for love nor money procure you either butter or cheese, they bringing ju st enough for themselves. 206 Here is anothe r ship I hear to windward, if I can get anything out of her shall not fayle to do it. Pray, Gentl eme n, if you can spare me a doctor, for I am mighti ly troubled with fa[i)ntings that take me clear of my !eggs. I am too weake, I can scarce stand. I hear nothing of news but what you had long before now. Pray lett me have the nails & the rest of the things formerly wrote for. 89. John Pinck Diclcies Cove Fort, 19 Oct. 1695 Yours of the 23 September & of the 14 instant have received & observe the contents thereof, and according to order have sent my accompts & lickw ise Mr Gorings remains, as you will perceive per the inclosed accompts. The sayes and bafts have received, but am afraid they wiJI turne to no accompl at this place. The six women slaves you sent fl] desire to know their pay, as also the black bricklayer & carpenter. We have two slaves that work verry well and are verry servicab le in the building , they therfore desire you would be pleased to advance them . Here is a whiteman by name John Ashfield whom the surveyor does approve of, if yo u think it convenie nt he desires he may have the allowance and work at the trade. You will find by rny accompts the expence that I have been at for building & getting things in readiness, so humbly desire you' ] pl[e]ase to allow it, I havci ng come as near2¡7 my expence as may be. The surveyor can informe you what trouble I am att. The latter rains have been verry exces ive and ha th.rown downe another of our bastians [=bastions] , so that we have no defence against any tfong that may happen, but nothing shall be wanting in me towards the forwarting [= forwarding] of it. According to your order have examined the whitemen about the mony they are indepted to Mr Goring. Edward Howell acknowledge 6Y2a& John Ashfield Sa, w[h]ich i aU they will owne. Sirs, please to take notice that Mr Jenning is indepted to me 1oz for twelve Guiney clouts he paid the slave with and 2a for an anchor of brandy, which I desire may be paid . I am verry sorry you have never a doctor to send us & that we must [be] beholding to our neighbour the Dutch, whose assistance we cannot get without we pay dear for it, I being forced to give the Dutch doctor half an ounce for bleeding the urveyor , he being almost dead with the plurisie [= pleurisy]. J desire the liberty of come[ing] downe to Cabo Corso to see if change of air will do any good. I am upon recovery, but every now & then troubled still with those fainting fitts. The rum have received, but do not know what quantity that contains. Hopeing you'l grant my request. PS. We must be forced to lye still till the surveyor returns againe. Please to take the ballance of my accompts and pass it to Mr Gorings, & please to returne my receipt. 90. John Pinck Di.ckies Cove, 29 Oct. 1695 Haveing thi opportunity of a canoe to Cabo Corsoe thought fitt to advi e you of affairs of the e pat1 . These people, upon what accompt I know not, on the 28 of this instant denied u water & were all up in arms, soe that thought they would have fight us. They take the opportunity off the fort being down & knowing that a slit deale door is all our protection. Dick , to whome you have been toe[= too] civill, more then he ever deserved , is the chieff fomenter of all this buisness. I thought it my duty to advise you of these things since they soe near relate to my masters intrest. Gentlemen , he is a verry foothish [=foolish] fellow & i let [=led] on by the nose by a parcell of rouges, who because they are indepted to Mr Goreing would be all ways in pallavers, to keep them out of reach of paying of it. I suppose they being most of them for the Dutch , they [ = the Dutch] may sett them to worke . I de ire if you thinck it convenient now wee lie in soe ticklish a condition we may have Cabo Cor oe ouldiers, that they may assist us in time when we shall have occasion. Wee cannot goe forward with the building because want a carpenter to fix the gurders [=gir ders] of our flankers, & 1 doe not question but that we may goe on verry well. We have need, Gentlemen , of a Captain for this place that can keep it[ ] people under , & not such [ms. 'sach'] a one as Captain Dickey, whoe instead of commanding is commanded by everyone, & if you please to chuse one then we shall have what we want for building ready to our hand . I could not gett anything done when the workmen first came up till Captain Dickey had a quarter cask of rume, & now he has had it is all one, nothing can be done by faire means, & if I should goe to seek compu lsion you would lay the blame on me and say [ have broake the articles of agreement & that alone am the hinderance of the building, soe that refer to your ju dgement. Diclties Cove, 6 Nov. 169591. John Pinck October have received, & observe the contents therein. ThisYours of the 3 ls' you'I receive by Captain Huccamee. The palaver I had made up two days before he came, for a green perpetuano which they demanded, thinking it better to comply with them at this time, the Castle being downe about our ears two or three nights before this palaver happened. lf Captain Billy would have been as great a rogue as Dickey they where to have come up and fight us, and because the other would not come, Dick would have come himself with what men he could have raised of his kindred, but none of them through Captain Billys perswasio ns be[ing] willing to come, he was forced to give over the attempt. Gentlemen, there being a Dutch interloper to windward who by the later end of this month will be ready to goe off, desire that youI please to give me liberty to come to Cabo Corso to clear all accompts, that I may take my passage home in him for Europe, you being very [ms. 'every'] sensible I have not injoyed my healtJ1since I have been in the country. So waiting your answer & hopeing you' ) grant my request. Dick.ies Cove, 13 Nov. 169592. Nathan Lailiom My master208 being verry bad, l made bold to write unto you to sati[s]fft:i)e that the reason of the cournew [=canoe] staying so long was because he was not able to writt, and desires you will be pleased to send a doctor, for he has had a violent f[elavour this five or six dayes and without spedy remedy we fear he will dye, and for ilie other two men that was sick on[e] is recovere[d) and [tlhe oilier is so bad he is not able to come down in the cornieuw. PS. My master would desire you to spare Doctor Jackson up for one weak if you can convenient ly. Dickies Cove Fort, 23 Nov. 169593. John Pinck Yours of the 9th instant I received, but was then in [ms. 'a') such a condition that [ was not able to answer it, neither am Tmuch better now, for I am afraid I shall lest' ) hand and all that side of my body. Theloose the use of my left [ms. 'occasion of my now writing I have a Portuguez come a hoare, if you thinck it convenient to entertaine him. He came on shoare the 20th in tant. Here is nothing of newes stirring in these parts, nor no ships to windward. PS. Plea e to send Bastian and the other aweyor [ = sawyer], because we are now forced to tay for them, as also a saw. 94. John Pinck Dickies Cove, 29 Nov. 1695 Yours of the 25 instant I received, & the Portugueeze has contracted for three years, soe have entertained him accordingly. William Seffton departed this life yesterday. He made me hi executor, by next you shall receive the coppy. I have gott one flanker up & paved itt. Desire soome scaffolding rope by first opportunity. 95. John Pinck Diclcies Cove, 13 Dec. 1695 Yours of the 9th instant have received, with Bastian & the sawyer, as al o the saw. I hall not faile to keep [t]hem to worck as much as I can. Two or three nights agoe a party of the Adoomes, soomes of Jappo's friend & Ante Sherry['s] own cousin sett upon him [=Ante Sherry] & routed him, he narrowly escapeing with one of his wifes & a lit le girle. 96. John Pinck Dickie Cove Fort, ** Dec. 1695 This day arrived in this road Capt. Osburne, an English interloper from England.209 I hear of no more shipping from Europe, my friends adviseing me that there will be no ships from the Company the e two months yett. 97. John Pinck Dickie Cove Fort, 21 Dec. 1695 Yours with the iron worck &a I received. [omission] [ad]vise you ofw[h]at news was stirring, but for the future hall be more large. Capt. Buttram & Capt. Pepperell are arrived afe,210 & Capt. Piles is supposed to be taken.21 1 The Hanniball is al o arrived safe. Capt. Buttram & Peperell are both a comeing out againe.212 The files advi ed of we are in great need off, our saw being oe blunt that they can scarce saw with them. We haved sawed out soome boards of sixteen inshes broad, & haith we these file houJd goe verry forwardly on, soe deseiring the files by first opportunity, I wish you a merry Christmas & a happy new year. Dicl<.iesCove Fort, 22 Dec. 169598. John Pinck This serves only as a cover to the inclosed. 213 Noting he being a privateer watering at Cape Tres Pointas, the Dutch galley comma nded her aboard as firing art her. They being unwilling 10 broak the pease , the Captain went on board with his commission, which they have cavilled at & doe designe to make her a price [= prize]. If they doe these things in the sea the next thing will be to take the fort, not privatly as they did Succondee, but openly. At noon day they desire to know your mind weither [= whetherj they shall follow the galley into Mina. They are not willi ng to breake the peace, but they say than can soon take the Dutchm an. PS. They desire [you) to send a canoe to advice them if they shalt come to Cabo Corso. They have eighty men in the ship , the Commander Capt. Robert Glover of the Resolution, privet man of ware, belonging 10 Antago [= Antego], 214 the owners Capt. Perry & Capt. Home of Ant.ago, & have been out of New York in New England seven weekes. 215 99. John Pinck Dickies Cove Fort , 26 Dec. 1695 Yours of the 24th instant I received with the letter there inclosed, which shall deliver. When any such thing [as] that if any Company ship should be to windward , I should be soe negligent as not to give timely advise of them. This serves on purpo se to advise you of the disorder that happined yesterday in the towne. These people have fallen upon some Dankary trader s that are there waiting for goods, & have beat them & have taken some of their money from them, which hath soc exasperacted them because Captain Dick would not redress them that one of the Chief of them bath stuck of knife in his throat & hath certai nly cutt it, if I had not timely sent the Serjeant down, who upon promise of you[r] protection hath disisted. 1 sent for Captain Dick, whoe lies in such a conditio n that a[t] present I am forced to hold a candell to the devilt.216 Where (= were] the fort up should not trouble you with these palaver. The surveyor desires that William Couboume may measure the wid[e]ness of the cooke roome & he'll gett the timber accordingly. Please to send the two files formerly wrote for. 100. John Pinck Dickie Cove Fort, 21 Jan. 1695/6 This serves only to advise you of the departure of the Generali of the Brandenburgs , who went away this moming .217 As soon as had advise of the interloper I sent on board (which was on the 20 instant) , he said he was verry sorry that be could not stay to take in your packett There is a little to windward [of] Axim an New England interloper, all the provisions be has to sell is butter & flower. There is also a Li bon Portuguese loaded with French brandy & wine. Noe other ships to windward. Sir , our whiteman being greatly in want of mony & being ready to tarve, desire you ! be pleased to send them their pay for the taste two months , here being no good vendable, I have launsed [ = launched]2 18 out all the mony in that I have in Castle charges, soe that unless I can have some mony or vendable goods I shall not be able for the future to send downe a cano coadvise you any thing that may happen . We are greatly in want of files formerly wrote for. The axle trees are ready when you please to send for them. 101. Bastian Ferdinand Di.clues Cove Fort, 21 Jan. 1695/6 I hope you will be please to give me the ame pay I formerly had, which was ten angles one month, for the worck leys [ = lies] verry hard upon me and my pay is but small, and if your Wor hips plea es to grant me it I hall be verry willing to doe any thing I can in the country, or else I think to goe home to my own country.219 102. John Pinck Dick.ies Cove, 5 Feb. 1695/6 This you will receive by Richard Richard on, who is very desirous to goe home in the Fauconberg. 220 I beg your pardon for sending him downe, but he informed me it was your order . Sirs , I humbly begg the favour of you, since my intentions are for Europe, that you'l be pleased to send some body up to take the charge of this place and that I may come downe in time before the ship goes for Cabo Corso, and not be hurried away just as the ship is goeing. Here is no news stiring in these parts save that the Mine canoes lie up and downe Takaradoe & Aquba.221 Here is just now come into this road Capt. John on, a Dutch interloper, who is bound for Holland .222 The fort is now in a postme of defence, only the thatch that is over the hall wilJ somthing annoy us, if wee shou ld happen to come to a fight, but I doe not fear any such thing unless it be from Mine people, the Cabbasheers promising me that they will stand by this place with their lives and fortune. The Serjeant in his passage to Cabo Corso when he came off of Comme nda was forced to returne back, the canoe men being afraid to venture. Anta Shrevy is at Axim getting an army, but not baveing money enough I beleive will come to nothing. Diclcies Cove Fort, 21 Feb. 1695/6103. John Pinck Yours I received, & by the bearer have sent the remainder of the goods I panyard. Some are sold, of which 1 shall give you an accompt when I come to Cabo Corso. Seeing I can have no justice from your hands, shall add no more. AJI accompt of goods panyard 250 brass panns 25 Cape de Verd cloths 18. quantity ban-ells powder 2 anchors rumm comes by the canoe 250 brass panns 17. quantity ban-ells of powder 2 anchors rumm Diddes Cove Fort, 24 Feb. 1695/6104. John Pinck This you'l receive by Henry Casey, who comes downe in a Ponuguze, to secure him from being seized by the Dutch,223 he being as he informes consigned for Cabo Corso. I once more desire that you'! please to send another to supply my place, & that I may come downe to Cabo Corso before the ship goes, for I suppose itt can'tt be very long now before she does goe, & besides, wee have no money nor goods to sell for any, that wee are ready to starve, the faith of these people extending no further then ready money. Edward Howell departed this life this instant, and what he had hath left by will to John Davis. There is to windward a St Thoma Portugu ze224 & a French man of war. 105. John Pinck Dick.ies Cove Fort, 7 March 1695/6 This you'! receive by the hand of a Portuguzc, who was seized upon by Captain Dick, belonging to Capt. Lawrence Schoza.225 After they took all he had, with much intreaty I gott him from them & accordingly have sent him downe, & Sirs, humbly beg that you'! please to send another in my roome, I being very sencible that it now cannot be long before the ship departs Cabo Corso, & for me to be sent away in a huny will be much to my cost, soe hoping you'I be favourable as to grant my request. [PS] There i a Dutch interloper in thi road & two Portuguse att Cape Tres Pointas An accompt of things wanting 3 new trowells I ha[lf] round file I three squarefile J heading chizell l broad ditto 3 small girnbletts [= gimlet ] I 000 ten peny nail es 2 augur [= augers]of J inch . 2 ditto . inch226 106. Thomas Buckeridge 227 Dickie s Cove Fort, 12 March 1695/6 This accompanys Mr John Pinck, from whom have received the Royal Companys fort and factory, att the [=thi ] place, with the merchandize, stores &c therein contained, as per inclosed inventoryes, the condition of which is none of the best, our walls being rai ed with swish, daily crack and settle, and notwithstanding some of them are thinly cased and covered with bricks, and what quantity of lime can allow, upon great storms of raine the ground through excess of moi ture yeilding to the foundation reduces them under such circumstances a the other, that unle s after every shower they are new tarrased and securd the water has free pas age into them and occasions them to fall , so that fear unless uch a quantity of shells can be procured as may raise itt with good stuff, it will never be finished. It i them [i.e. shell ) I want, and shall endeavour to gett if possible , more whereof shall advise per next. What good found in the warehouse were extreamly damaged, a you may perceive. The blanketts very rotten and some of them full of maggotts, [I] gave to the slaves, being a ham' d to see them among other good . The sayes being 10 in number, I know not what to doe with, being soe damaged, also some other good not much better. Here are in the country some Danck:ra traders, which have been with mee for pcrpetuanoes, sheets and basons, the latter whereof and some carpetts have sold. I received your letter of the 9th instant with things mentioned att the foot thereof, and want for the sw-veyor 12 slitt deales, 4 small gimblett, and 1 acids [= adze). I notice you[r] pleasure concernjng the timber, which is not yett ready, but will [be) before an opportunity of sending it. l desire you supply me with goods, arms (what I have here being good for nothing), also swords for the men, cartridg[e] paper, the Gunner haveing none left, 2 small ladels and worrncs, a sheep skin, some scupcr nailes. 40 of my granadoes want new fuses. I hear nothing of Shrevy or shiping. I find the blacks somthing more insolent more then they use to bec.228 One of the canoe men belonging to Dickies Cove which brought mee up hither, Mr Pinck putting in irons, telling me he was his slave, I am forc't to keep him in the fort, untill I know your pleasure, to gratific the black[s), who have made great complaint thereon, saying he was pawnd to Mr Pinck for payment of l4a which he had in goods and brandy , for to satisfie the Cabbasheers for making a pallavera which he had att that time, & that 8a thereof are to be discounted upon his going 8 times to Cabo Corso, so that there are but 6 remaining, which they offer to pay. Mr Pinck charges him with 8a more, which he paid att Succondee , haveing one of his canoes panyard there upon this fellowrsl head for stealing a knife. Sirs, pray forgett not the great canoe, with which desire may be sent my beding, brandy and hampar l= hamper] of wine, if she may come with safety. PS. I shall want some paper, haveing none here. Please by the Dickies Cove canoe to send my firkin of butter, 6 cakes of soap, and what more she will hold and may be hazarded. I desire some wax wafers,229 haveing none is occasion of my not sealing here. Dickies Cove, 24 March 1695/6 107. Thoma s Buckerid ge Yours of the 13th instant with the necessaries at the foot thereof have received, also 10 new muskitts (5 old ones being wholly unserviceable are herewith returned), and what last wrote for, 12 slitt dales, 4 small gimblett s, with threed and needles more for the surveyor, 1000 ten peny oailes, 3 plaines and plaine irons, a fore plaine, a jack plaine, a joynt er, a broad axe, a gudge [=gouge) and a firmer.230 The ladles you sent are to large for our gunns, and for the fuses (our Gunner not knowing how to fitt and fix them) am little the better. l shall endeavour to put of the damnified goods, to what advantage am able, & must desire you to putt a small price upon the sayes, which otherwise, being no commodity in this countrey, will lie untill they are worth nothing. I believe att 12a each may in a short time dispose of them. The chest of beads can also sell but not att six taccoes per pound, wherefore if you will suffer me to vend at a lesser rate I doubt not to make a considerable sayle thereof. What I wrote in my last concerning the fort was what I experienced when here before, and have great cause still to feare, the walls which tumbled being built of the same or little better stuff. The surveyor according to my judgement hath done and daily uses his endeavour , which without materialls can but little availe. Both he and I hope they will not fall againe, and keep our slaves continually att work in getting shell between this and Butteroe, from whence think wee may procure 40 or 50 butts, which shall be sure (to) use to what advantage wee can. I am told their are great quantity of shells about 6 leagues to leward which may more then finish our work and that Mr Pinck hath payed for them, but unle s I have a great canoe and halfe a dozen small ones for bringing them hither, shaJJ reap little benefitt of them, the people here being unwilling to goe without extrodina1y payment, and then but when they please, not halfe loading their canoes, but if you please to send me such from Cabo Corso or allow me to purchase the latter here for Companys accompt , I have canoe men belonging to me to padle them, who shall wholly imploy in fetching thereof, whereby doubt not in a little time and without much charge to procure lime enough for our building , if some new pallavar of the negroes does not interveen. The timber for the cook roome, 4 planckes for gunn carridges and peices for axle trees, lyes ready for sending. Captain Dickie and Cabbasheers demand their Chistmas dashees according to contract made with me formerly, which Mr Pinck hath not payed. The former desireth his cloth to be blue, which if you please to send me one or two more for such Cabbesseers as may be servisable it will not be amiss. What the Cabbasheers are to have at Christmas and at their dancing time in June, be pleased to advi e. The coppy of their contract being not with mee, have forgott. Here are abundance of Dankra traders continually baiteing me for goods, who would not lett me rest until[ I promised to write for some, which if they come safe, could heartily wish were supplyed with, as well to defray factory charges as to sati fie the tradder , from whom have bought four cows, which if you please to have shall send downe by first opportunjty. I believe this will prove a place of gr at trade and in some time will fully repay the Companys charg[e) of building with interest, if new warrs do not brake forth. I here the Taggees have fought, upon which have various reports, wherefore hope it may be for the Companeys interest.231 I lost in comeing Mr Mellross note of debts,232 which desire to have a coppy of per next, also some flints, haveing none that are good in the fort , with corkers [=caulkers] tools for the surveyor. Asherrey hath lately been at Succond e panyaring his brother Mensa's women, and i now within two miles of us at a Cabbasheers croome named Conconoco with some force, pretending he is going to Axhim. I have bought some snappans [= snaphances], which designe to keep in the fort for use thereof, that if any disturbance should happen the Companys blacks and others belonging to mee may be armed for our defence, the rnuskitts l have not being sufficient for halfe our people neither so ready as the former, wherefore desire they may be allowed in my first accomp t. PS.Jam in great want of a small vise[= vice]233 for cleaning our arms. Please to send some swords and bandileers. [gap in correspondence, April 1696 to March 1697) 234 Dickies Cove, 2 April 1697108. Wiliam Puplett Yours of the 27 ultimo with two marks gold yesterday received, and the same day came a man into the bushes near the Castle who sent to know your answer, to whom I returned answer according to your orders, who immediately replyed that nothing lcsse then their former demands should end the pallaver , and that your slaves must no more go into the woods, till such time you send their soldiers th.rec bendys, which money they have been very urgent for,235 the Dankara traders being very desirous to come and trade but are prevented for want of the said soldiers money, and if that was paid I shou ld have a free passage into the wood, and presume a good trade. The Cabbasheers here want to goe for Cabo Corso againe, seeing they have no pallaver to make.236 Wee have burnt one kiln of lime, and thatchl the hall, and now most of the slaves must stand still, they not being suffered to goe into the woods, which with the continuaU raines wee have and have had (ere[= ever] since the surveyor arrived) shall proceed very slowly toward repaireing the Fo11. What the canoamen informed your worships is notorious false and forged lies, to excuse themselve s for running away. Incloscd is the accompt of charges for last three months, the ballance of 'd attwhich desire may have sent by first shipp. The two shovells sent was stopComenda, soc desire two more. The nailes and axe are received. As for the 14 perpetuanoes trusted237 the Addoomes, I did it judgeing it would have proved for the Royal Companeys interest, and [as] for not adviseing thereof, could not gett a canoa to goe for Cabo Corso, and they [ = the Adorns] pretended hast[e) for their more expedition comeing back into the countrey, 238 but if I must ee it paid (which is very hard upon me) I desire I may have the five men and boys sent me by first shipp, that I may make what money I can of them towards paying myself.239 The two lusty women and Anthony are the two I found here at Mr Phillips death,240 the latter was pawned to Dickie and the former was sent (as the Serjeant informed me) for protection and not for pawnes, Mr Phillip not takeing one pawne the time of his being here. The daminner 241 his wife and a lusty young man are pawne for the powder and bans 242 that I trusted the Addoomes, the five which I took for the perpetuanoe are Atoo, Coffe, the man that is sick, the boy that has a gold feitich about his neck, and the tall young man. The other a little boy I kept for better satisfaction of the other five. I humbly de ire the 3 pawnes of Dickies to be returned me when the shipp comes, except Dickie will send the money, which is 4oz 4a 6ta, Mr Pinson can satisfie you which,243 and the fiv[e] pawned for the perpetuanoe . Two of our townes people are panyard in the bu hes and will not be delivered till the pallaver is made up. I doe not perceive but the longer the pailaver is defened, the more inflexable the Antas are, soe desire a speedy answer. PS. I have a very hard welling in my belly and stopage in my tomach, that I cannot fetch my breath without great paine, which makes almost incapable of any bussiness. Just now King Badue sent to me to know your answer, and also was very urgent for the souldiers money, saying he had given pawnes for it. I presume if the money was paid would be a great insight to me, to ee their reallity of performing their promise , and should know how far they de erve more. 109. William Pupplett Dickie Cove, 6 April 1697 This serves to desire some per on to take charge of this factory, my indisposition since my last being increased, with a fevor which makes me wholly uncapable of any business, not being able to stir out of my bed, or to speake to anyone without a great deal of paine, and but little hopes of long continuance in this world, therefore desire a speedy answer with your orders to come for Cabo Corso. 110. Henry Vincent Dicl<ies Cove, 15 April 1697 This comes by Mr Pupplett,244 with whom have inventorye d this warehouse and factory, and to whom I refere you to receive an accompt of affaires in these parts, desireing your needf1.1llinstructio ns accordingly. I desire you] please to send a cask of beefe, here being great scarcity of provitions , [and] some money to defray the charges of this Factory, here being no trade so can receive none. 111. Henry Vincent Diclcies Cove, 27 April 1697 Since the departure of Mr Pupplett from Lhis place I have been mightily importuned by the blacks to make up this pallaver, and [blank] I sent to Captai n Billy, who came to me and expresses a great desire of peace, that he may come and live in the town, which he and all his people would so soon as the pallaver is ended. I also sent to King Badue, but he would not come, but sent me word he and his people would come and build the towne and live here if the pallave r was ended. All they demand is three bendys eighteen angles for the soldiers in the countrey to make them lay downe their armes, and some liquor to drink, but without will not make any pallaver. I hear King Badue gave some pawnes to the countrey people to keep them quiett till the pallaver was over, and that they have brought him his pawnes againe , soe last Munday they panjard 4 of our townes women, and our townes people went out after them, but could not overtake them. The two Cabbasheers you sent were very impatient for one of them to goe to you, soe have sent one in the canoa. Please to send us three or four thousand bricks for the st~ps, and some odd things. As yell cannot begin the flanker because cannot send into the woods for timber. There is no shipp at Cape Tres Pointas, but as soon as bear of any shall advise. PS. Here is no scales, blowpanesnor sifters,245 whenany occasion offers, soe desire you'l please to send some, as also some cartridge paper and some come, here being but little to supply the slaves as well as ourselves. 112. Henry Vincen t Dickies Cove, 4 May 1697 Yours of the 21 & 22d ultimo have received, and sent immediate ly to Ainam, King Badue and Billy, the last of whom came but the others would not, returning answer that my predicesso rs had sent them such word as I, but they could never see anything, oe would have the goods sent to them, whjch I refu ed to doe, but sent King Badue and the others word that if they would send me some pawnes [I] would end them some part of the good , but they refused, soe [I] took two pawnes of an old Cabbasheer that live in the towne and sent them 3 perpetuanoe , upon which on Saturday last King Badt1e and Billy came on to the sand but would not come to the Castle, soe I went to them and at la t gott them to take a feit[i]ch to be true to the English and to keep any body from comjng to mole t them in getting of wood, or i.n trade or any way whatsoever, but on the contrary to help them in the afore aid things, as also against anybody that should oppose them, and they made me take a feitich to protect them, which ended [the matter]. I gave them the good to the value of 3 bendyes , but their greatest pallaver was for 10 bendeye more for the Cabbasheer , this being for the soldiers to lay by their arrnes, which they say Capt. Peppere!J promi ed them at a pallaver with them,246 to which I answered I knew nothing of that nor had no orders for any such thing but would give them the 3 bendys, which at last they took, but put into my feitich that I would write to you and send them a true answer of what you wrote, with the full quantity of what you allowed them if any thing, but I did not know whether you would give them any thing or not. Captain Ainam did not come, but King Badue told me he would come and take a feitich if you would deliver up his cozen you have at Cabo Corso, 247 but hope the paire will be as well, Captain Billy haveing begun to build in the towne, and he and King Badue are the Chief Cabbasheers in these parts, but they are much against Captain Dickie , and they wiU not have him to come here any more, if he should [it] would breed fre h trouble . This day have sent into the woods to gett what wood we can to burne hell . Mr Howard tells me there i timber enough downe to last the sawyers this month, soe please to send them, for we cannot remove nor doe any thing with it ti IL they come. The Branden burgh ship is come to Cape Tres Pointas from tradeing to windward, they saw no ship besides the Barbadoes man. I have herewith sent you the petitition of John Davis, he being one that was here at the fight248 the blacks doe not effect[= affect] him.249 If you send for him please to send us somebody in bis roome. I bave also sent the Cabbasheers by this canoa. PS. Please to send us 3 or 4 paire bandeleers or catuch [ = cartouche] boxes and a screw to draw a muskett.250 As to other necessaryes referr you to the surveyors note and my last letter. Pray send some writing paper by the canoa, for I have no more than what I herewith send you. 113. Henry Vincent Dickies Cove, 15 May 1697 I received yours of the sixth instant on Sunday last, at which time was violently ill of a feavour and have been soe almost ever since, but now thank God am a little better , if it hold. Capt. Piles sailed from hence with the slaves as you ordered on Munday night last to Cape Tres Pointas, whe re he now is.25 1 He desired [sic: = delivered] one cask of beef here , and (as the Serjeant informs me, who measured it, I being sick) eighty one chests come, leaveing some with Mr Gore at Commenda.252 The come is very indefferent, and wonder any body should enforme your Honour s of such a falsity of selling any come here, there is no such thing , nor I had never any body come to aske to buy come, only Dickies cozen a chest when I came here first, but I do not perceive the countrey people doe want come, and here it will lie and spoyle, for I have nowhere to keep it but on a moist floor, and the drying it will keep halfe our slaves alwayes in employ. I only writte for a little for our own and slaves use. Please to send some nicconees and sheets, those being the goods the blacks ask for. When the sawyer comes from Cape Tres Pointa s shall observe your orders in cutting out the timber. The Doctor has sent a note of mediccines he wants, please to lett him have what can be spared, for he has none, and know not how soon I may be sick againe, it only being removed with the Jesuitt barke ,253 soe desire you') please to dispatch the canoa againe with all speed. I do not hear of any shipps to windward, but when that or anything else offers you may be sure of adv.ice. PS. Pray send me some writeing paper by the canoa, as also scailes, waites [=we ights], bloy,, pane & other necessaryes I have before wrote for. They gott all the things our surveyor wrote for at Comenda, desire some more. 114. Henry Vincent Dickies Cove, 4 June 1697 Yours of the 18 and 24 last past I have received, with the three barrells of powder on accompt of the Royall African Company of England. I am sorry for the mischance the other canoa mett with at Comenda. 254 I have observed your orders and sent Howard, slaves and corn to Cape Tres Pointas the same day the canoa came. As to the natives I cannot see but they are wholly reconciled to the English, for since my last Captain Ainam has been here, and took a feitich to be true to the English, but would not come to the Castle till his cozen at Cabo Corso be delivered to him, the which he made me promise to write to you and send him your answer. However he took a feitich not to hinder u any way, nor panyar our people (which he remaines firm to), so that now no body molests us. Here wa lately the Dutch Generalls boy came to make a pallaver with the Antas, hi busine s was to gett them to fight Great Taggee, 255 and offered them money (how 01uch I know not), but they refused all offers, and sent me word of itt next day by my boy, who was there, which refusal! I encouraged them in, and reminded them of their feitiches, and now they seem very true, soe hope all will continue well. As to the measure of the come, I advised you before [I] was sick when it came, and left the mea ureing to the Serjeant, soe when the slaves returne from Cape Tres Pointas, shall measure it, and advise you of. I have nothing to advise of any shipping but those that are past by and hope safe with you, which would have done sooner but want canoas, soe hope you will please to order two up. PS. Pray send me some paper, the last you send being lost al Conunenda, as al o the ironwork . A to the necessaryes have sent you the Gunners note. 115. Thomas Howard Dickes Cove, 2 July J697 I doe herein give your wor hips an accompt of what materialls is wanting here: four iron barrs, 4 foot long apeice flatt, and [with] mortaces [= ruo1tises] to lett in the 4 as es with shoulders to them,256 which wee have occation for one of our flankers, three stone hammers, six bills, two pa.ire of linepins 257 and one broad ax[e]. Worthy Sirs, I humbly desire you would be pleased to end me one white roan to assist me, either carpenter or bricklayer, one to look after the brick.layers, or the other to goe in the woods, to look a:ffter them, for I cannott look a:ffter them all my selfe and they are so lazy I cannott make them work. Worthy Sirs, the things wrote for before have received, a two hand aw from on board Capt. Piles, and a grindstone and two old shovells that were broak to peices in makeing the sawpitts att Cape Tres Punctu . Worthy Sir , I understand he had another saw and two axes for us, which he carryed away with him again. Worthy Sirs, I desire your worshipps to send 3 iron shovells more, and a pair of hand screws to gett our timber on the pitt, for itt is so larg[e] thatt wee cannott doe without. Likewise some ropes with all to draw our timber out of the countryes. Worthy Sirs, I de ire your wor hipps would be pleased to send people to make bricks, and I do not q[u]e tion but in two or three month time, if itt please God, I shall bring Dickes Cove in good repair. Dicke scove, 3 July 1697116. Henry Vincent Yours of the 10th ultimo have received, since which Ainim has sent to me about his cozen, and r returned him the same answer you sent me, with which he seemes to be well sallisfyed, and has sent me word [he] wiU come Lo the Castle. The Antas have been mightily of late affraid of the Adoome s comeing, but now hear nothing of itt, Captain Anta,258 one that was with the Adomes, being come to make fri[e]nds with Ainim. If [they] should come Ainim would find but few to helpe him, for Billy nor Baddue I hear will not, and the Brandenburgs have putt all the Cabbosheers att Accadah in irons for agreeing to take Ainims money. 259 At present are all things very peaceable. Since Capt. Pepperrell went down260 have received a letter from the Branderborgs Generall , he wanted two of his slaves. One was here which I sent him, the othe r I hear went downe in the said Captains shipp. Please to order him to be looked for and sent, he is brother to one Hennicoe , a cozen to Aggubah Braffoe. 261 I desire you will please to send me these following goods, having been much inquired for (vizt) two ches ts sheets, and some nickones and brass panns, with one cask two pound and one ditto one pound pewter basons. This cask that have here upon opening find to be four pound basons. In yours of the l 0th ultimo , you were pleased to mention [I) must make the come received as in your last. The come I have measured since, and find itt to be no more than whatt before writt you, and have tryed the chest by several] others, in which is noe default. If Capt. Piles had one hundred sent on board [he] would have done well to have seen the delivery of them, for the Serjeant will avouch there was but 81 brought here, therefore with submission to your honours think itt not reasonable to charg[e] 11 chests att 3a each more than have received , so desire you will please to consider of itt. PS. I forgott in my last so thought fitt to advise here that when Ainim took his fettish I gave them the six yards cloath you alowed. Pray send me some writeing paper, for have received none. As to other necessaryes for the building , refer you to the surveyors letter.262 117. Henry Vincent Diclcies Cove Fort, 14 July 1697 Yours of the 8th in lant have received, and shall endeavour according to our orders to keep all quiet here as wee are at present, but our Cabbo heers here have been a little disatisfied ince the returne of this last canoe, by hearing all their pawne are lately put in irons at Cabo Cor o, for what reason they know not, and have been to aske of me, which I could not re olve them, so would have me write to you, that might give them an accompt. Pray send the goods, a carpenter and iron work as soon as possible can, for at pre áent lye very open and cannot proceed for want. You herewith have our Sergeant, who haveing some buisness at Cabo Corso Castle, with your promiss to hi uncle, have gave leave to goe downe in this canoe, per whome when retumes desire you will please to send money to pay our people, they being very desirou to be paid, it now being 4 months since. Here will be wanting besides what I have received two marks. PS. I desire when you send the goods above you will send the rumm, that which had beein[g] expended at palavers and belliaring. 263 118. Henry Vincent Dickies Cove, 5 Aug. 1697 Yours of the 21st and 31st last pa t are come to my hands, and note their contents. As yett have not spoke to the Cabbosheers, ome of them being buisey in rowsawing in the country,264 when return shall give you an accompt. The cause of this [is] the bearer, who is so troubled with a distemper in his side that be is incapable of duty, o on his reque t sent him down to Caba Corso Castle , his name is Anthony Caravelo, a Po[r]tugueze. I hear Shumaw people and the Addams are prepareing to fight Great Taggee. 265 There i a Dutch interloper at Cape Tres Pointas under Deans [= Danes] collars, who ay there is a great talk of peace in Europe, but the King is in Flanders, & the King of Sweden is dead.266 I have not anything more materiall but only to desire you wiU please to hasten the sloop267 with those things wrote for, with an addition of one bale perpetuanoes & J ca k of knives . PS. Pray when send up the sloop send somebody tor leive John Davis, who i very desirou to be gone. Dick.ies Cove, 21 Aug. J697119. Henry Vincent This accompanyes Captain Oicl<ies cozen, to whom have told what you write me, from whom could gett no other answer but that he would waite on your Honours himself, so is the bearer hereof. Captain Ainam has lately been impatient for the comeing of {his] brother, and desired me when sent to lett a man goe with him to his brother and to speak to your Honours, so desire to know your pleasure. On the 19'h instant our surveyor said would go to Cabo Corso Castle, which I did not deny him, seeing him very earnest to goe, but whatt accompt I know not but suppose the cause was liquor, so desire your Honours to send him or some other, with a carpenter and neccssaryes before wrote for to finish the fort, which now lies in no good condition. I have heard from the Generali of Munfort 268 about the slave, and he says he has spoke to the Negroe whose slave he is, who will by no means allow of his slaves being detained from him unless his freinds will pay him five ounces gold, which if they will may keep him, elce if not sent they will seek satisfaction some other way, so please to send him or money by first opportunity, the Generali being very kind on all occasions and given me an invitation to see him, for which shall waite your approbation. I have several times wrote to your Honours for goods, which you have been pleased to w1ite you will send, which pray do with all speed, I haveing sent one into the Dancres country, who is now returned with traders to King Badue['s] croome waiting for England goods, soe if not speedily sent I beleve will be gone. PS. I desire you will send me twoe bale pcrpetuanoes, haveing wrote before for but one. [gap in correspondence, Sept. & Oct. 1697] Dickies Cove, 6 Dec. 1697120. Henry Vincent This serves to acquaint your Honours that yesterday passed by this place Jacob De Brayne [= BruyneJ commander, 269 who sayes there is a peace concluded between English, Holland and all the Confedirates exfc)ept the Elector of Braodenberge and the Swishes, for chem there is six weeks time for the English He saw no shipp to and Dutch to meditate [=mediate] between them.270 windward, except the D ane which i past by.271 Wee have now gott up the two flankers and worked up all our shells, so cannot proceed in the building without you will please to order some up, and a carpenter and a halfe round file to set the saw to cut timber for the hall. Our urveyor saye , if had the necessaryes above would finish the fort in less then two months time, so hope you will incourage it. If had any green Welch plains could di pose to the vallue of a mark, as also some blanketts. 121. Henry Vincent Dickes Cove, 28 Jan. 1697/8 This erves to inclose the Jetter from the Royall Atfrican Company to your Honours brought by Capt. Cotterrell, who is a permissioned shipp,272 and one from him,273 who is now here wooding and watering, and expects to be down at Cabo Corso in six or eight dayes. He advises of a shipp that will be here shortly, the Commanders name i Capt. Burrows,274 which is all the Companyes can hear will be here soone, but advises they had taken up six more for these parts and four for the Norward,275 and there is a great many other Engli h ves ells coming out to supply the Spanish West 1ndies with slaves. Of late I have a feavour but now wee are all verry well. I have entered the Portuguezes into the Companyes service from the 31st December 1697 at 1 oz 9t the two months, their names are Anthony Goonso]ou and Antony Pararo, which hope you will please to note, as aJso Emannell Farnandoe, of whome have formerly advised. 122. Henry Vincent Dickes Cove, 28 Jan. 1697 /8 If you please to advise what you intend to pay Robert Wright, who was Gunner at Annamaboe. Hi bargaine he sayes was for one ounce four angles eight taccoes with the Company in England. By being Gunner he received 1oz 8a 8t, so he only hopes youl deduct none but his advance pay. My orders are to pay one ounce eight taccoes the two months. 123. Thomas Howard Dickes Cove, 22 March 1697/8 These few lines are most humbly to desire yom Worships would be pleased to pay my sallery what is due to me to the 19th instant to Mr Combrow, begging your Worships pardon for troubling you so suddenly, this being a very hard place to live at. May it please your worships I have been at the charge of canoe hire twice, for bringing up of iron worke, which I hope your Worships will please to consider me somthing for it, for the Cheife will not aJ1owme any thing towards it Likewise there was a file and carpenter to cutt the teeth of the saw, which stood me in two angles. May it please your Worships I shall gjve you an accompt of what things is wanted, (vizt) three new iron shovells, one thousand of ten penny nailes, two trowells, two iron crowes, halfe a sheet of lead. Pray be pleased to send a new fille for the old saw, for that is broke which I sent downe, and likewise four old erowes. Humbly desireing your Worships would be pleased to send the iron worke by renirne of this canoe, by reason there is none that's fitt for the slaves to work with. Dickes Cove, 23 March 1697/8 124. Henry Vincent In answer to yours of the J6th instant, have sent my accompt to the ultimo December, and the rest to the ultimo Febbruary shall foollow in the Gally,276 and the remainder for the future shall follow monthly, but for the vending my goods here at present is not to be thought on, the country people are all at warrs one with another , which stopps the passages.277 When any thing offers for the Royall Company shall be sure to advise. At present wee have no quarrell with them, but on the contrary all our fri[e]nds, tho' know not how soone [theyl may come to disturbe our Blacks in this towne, whome I hope your Honours will please to protect if [they] come, it being Billy and his people who was the first promoters of a conferance with the Blacks. J have nothing else to add on this affaires. By this canoe have sent Robert Wright, and paid him according to your orders 1Oa 4t per month, and his arrears to the 25th Febbruary 1697 [= I698]. Have also sent two blunderbusts [=:::blunderbusses) and twelve musquetts, to be exchanged for others, these being faulty. ram glad your Honours are pleased to expediate [=expedite] the builrung the fort, which when the people arive may soone be finished. PS. Just now wee see a small vessell in the offen, which wee hope to be the sloope. When arives shall load her with all expedition. Since my last have had one Ardah slave dead,278 as also one white man Portugueze of whome have advised before, his name was Anthony Gonsolvus. I have entered one Dutch man for the Royall Company who runn from a shipp. I also sent you one nine hand canoe by Mr Pinson, of which desire your notice by next. Have no advice of any shipp. Pray send the fiUes and crowes by the canoe for Mr Howard. 125. Henry Vincent Dickes Cove, 29 March 1698 Since my last of the 23d instant, the sloope is arived with one white and two Black sawers. According to your orders have loaded her with wood, and laken out her shells, which wee hope will finish the fo1t. They sawers are beginning to work, who shall take care to forward as much as I can. Wee have no signe of vending any goods here, the people in the country being still in troubles, tho' hope shortly will all be quietted, the Generali of the Brandenberghs being dead, who was a great promoter of them.279 I have herewith sent you one of the Ardah women slaves with her child, her name is Yaw, who breeds a great disturbance amongst the rest of the slaves, being aJways fighting about her, soe desire you will please to send Bristow the sawers wife in her roome. PS. Having noe more paper then have herewith sent you, is the reason have not sent my accompts remaining, but if receive any a wrote for by Jast, hall be sure to send by first opportunity, being all ready, only want fair drawing out. Pray send a broad ax. 126. Henry Vincent Dickes Cove, 14 April 1698 Yours I received, and have ctispatched your letter on board Capt. Rawlin[g]s at Cape Trees Punctus, who i since ailed. 280 Have received the lead, gunns and crowes &ca. According to your orders have inventored the factory together with Mr Gerrard Gore, and he has the ballance with him, as also accompts to the date of the inventory. 281 I desire you would be pleased to send here two bail.es of perpetuanoe , a al o powder and rumme, the stock here being very low. In hort time hope may have occa ion to write for more goods, but at present vend nothing. You were not pleased to mention the receipt of the I.ave I sent, in your last, soe desire will in your next. Herewith goes John Davis, one off our souldiers, he being desireous to goe to Cape Coast. Here is nothing new to advise in these parts, and as to necessaryes wanting refer you to the surveyors note enclosed. 127. Henry Vincent Dickes Cove, 1 May 1698 Yours of the 29th last past have received, together with fifty perpetuanoe s blue, fifty gallon rumme and two barrells powder, in which I find wanting one fourth barrell in each, and have sent certificates accordingly. Have received yours and Mr Gabbs orders for timbcr,282 which shall endeavour to supply as soone as possible can, butt are in want of the files [ms. 'till ...') and other needfu lls wrote for. Have entered a sou]dier for the Royall Company, bis name is John Johnson, he made his escape from Capt. Hall, who is passed by. As for other shipping have heard of none for the Coast, only bis companion, as one Bristow [=Bris tol) man, but he advised two Companyes shipps are gone for Sherbrow and those parts.283 Yesterday the two a,mies in these parts engaged, wherein the Brandcnbergs partly worsted the others, having beaten them out of the feild and taken a great many, soe hope in short will be forced to make peace. At present have not else, when have shall advise. PS. Have sent by the canoe five planks for gunn carriages, l\vo at seaven feet long each, and three at 14 feet each, which is all our canoe men would venture to carry. Dickies Cove, 31 May 1698128. Henry Vincent This serves to acquaint you that Abraham the Bomboy is just now arrived from Succondee, who brings the sad news of Little Taggee's takeing thatt fort, the morning att 6 a clock, wounding severall of the white men and one he thinks was killed.284 He sayes be beard from Succondee people who rnnn affter him to Pompony ,285 [they} say the white men were sent to the Dutch fort. They panyarred him att Pompony with two more slaves, who they keep, demandi ng a bendy for them. Shall see to gett them if possible, but thinking he can tell more then Tcan leame in the space of time, have sent him with this. Wee are all att quiett here alt present, butt now they are come soe far know nott butt thatt they may advance. Wee have noe provitions, soe desire you may supply us of all sorts as well as cann. Come can provide here. Pray be pleased to send us up with speed some musqueus, there is nine that belongs here now at Cabo Corso, and these thatt arc [here] most out of order. Dickes Cove, 27 June 1698129. John Hust These arc most humbly to acquaint your Worsh.ipps that Mr Vincent, being invited by the Dutch Coap man of Buttrew yesterday, and coming home in a canoe, was oversett just at the mouth of the bay, and was drown'd , tho' all help that possible could bee could not save his ljfe. Worthy Sirs, have herewith sent your Worshipps the key of his desk, itt being ealed up before four or five men. Jt has not been opened, nor nobody k.nowe what is in it. De ireing your Worships would be pleased to send somebody up a 'Oone a possible you can. Here being not one dropp of liquor in the Castle, and the Blacks Christmas being just at hand, the Dutch Coapman being greatly in love wilh the Blacks, I think he may inveigle them to him, if they have not what they expect at the time. They are every day more and more in building, and it is likely to be a fine place. 130. Captain Nedd286 Dickes Cove, 28 June 1698 My humble service to you aJI. May it please your worships I have herewith seat you a sheepe, which de ire your Wor hipps will be pleased to except [=accept] off, the Coapman being dead. Captain Dick and I was and are building a croome just by the Castle, which wee doe think may be good towards the Castle. Captain Billey and others are not very willing wee should build, but the Anta up country people are very willing, for it may be great cause of bringing trade to the Castle. Worthy Sirs, wee took advice wilh the Chiefe before he dyed, and he was very willing to it and soe wee did sett about it. Worthy Sirs, I desire you would be pleased to speak to the next Chiefe which come up, that the building may goe on, for I am very willing to doe the Engli h all the ervice I can. 131. John Hust Dickes Cove, 30 June 1698 Your two letter by the two hand canoe have received, and being informed it was the cuslome to open them, I did make bold, begging your Worshipps pardon if I have done amis . Worthy Sirs, haveing returned the letters, there being money in one of them, which your worships wiU receive. Worthy Sirs, for shipping wee doe beare not of one of any sort. The man that Mr Vincent sent to Succondee brought word there was three gunn and Capt. Kempthorn.s boate287 and a five hand canoe, but for moveable things, they are all carryed away. The man that went brought with him 19 great hott, there being noe Blacks live there.288 The Dutch have withdrawne their fort and will not settle the(re] tiJl the English are settled first, the Coapman which lived there is removed to Buttrew. 289 As for the two slave that was there, Mr Vincent ha redeemed them, and one Cabo Corso man. 132. Thomas Howard & John Hust Dickes Cove, 9 July 1698 Yours of the 30th June have received, and will take what possible ácare wee can of what your Worshipps have orderd to us. Worthy Sirs, wee cannott gett this man290 to inventory or any thing else, and here is goods goes out dayly, but upon what accompt wee know not. Worthy Sirs, for what Mr Vincent have left wee have taken an accompt of all, espetially odd things, they being in the Chiefs roome. Worthy Sirs, Mr Vincent has four men slaves in irons, and one girle and two canoemen pawns. Worthy Sirs Mr Vincents desk of which your Worships have the key, the seale was broaken since this man came here, not wholy, but wee doe th.inkhere is nothing diminished, or it was open'd. Worthy Sirs, wee looked over Mr Vincents things, wee found two letters for your Worships which came out of a Dutch interloper , they being in the Chiefs hands. 133. Richard Sheldon Dickes Cove, 15 July 1698 Yours of the 5th and 12th instant, l received. Affter my arrivall here, I went with Mr Howard and Serjeant Hust, and unsealed Mr Vincents chamber doore, and found in his roome most of the Royall Companys goods, and accordingly took an inventory of them, whilst the said Mr Howard and Serjeant was present, likewise the apparrell of th.e deceased Mr Vincent. Affter that a Dutch interloper came into our road. Our gunns being then unloadded, I went with said Mr Howard and Serjeant and unsealed the Royall Companys warehouse doore, for powder to load the gunns, which was the reason of opening the warehouse. Likewise at the same time took out one chint and two pounds of beads, the above being present. The next day affter the inventory was taken I added them to the invoice, and shall make my selfe debtor in my accompts. This really is the truth. As for Mr Vincents pawnes &ca, [I) have [them] ready against the Gally arrives, with the inventorys, but the Gally is not yett arrived, she lyes as I am informed at Shuma, and has been there this 7 or 8 dayes . The difference betwixt Captain Nedd and Captain Billy is about building his house nearer this Castle, and to him I beleive I could make up this pallaver for a case or two of liquors, in the meane time I shall endeavour. I doubt not when your Worsh ipps receive Mr Vincents accompts to find your expectations answered as to the warehou se, which shall always be the endeavour of [myself]. PS. The .ii1formation Mr Howard and the Serjeant gave your Worships was mearly out of mallis [=malice], because I threatned them about interlopeing goods which they had in the fort, likewise a slave which the Serjeant took upon him to buy and put in irons unknown to me in the fort. 134. Richard Sheldon Dickes Cove, 15 July 1698Being informed last night of a Briggantine to windward, l immediatelydispatched a canoe away to leame advice of the Captain if he heard of anyCompanys shipps to windward, who advises me that he left on the 7th instant atCesters a Company shipp, The Prince of Orrange, Capt. Daniell Commander,she waited only for wind and weather when he left. Here inclosed is two lettersdirected to your Worshipps, which I found tycd up in a bagg among some otherpapers of Mr Vincents. 135. Richard Sheldon Dickes Cove For[tJ, 18 July 1698Hope by this time your Worshipps are partly made sencible that I have not beenin this short time I have been here, so remiss in the Companyes affaires and yow.Worsbipps orders, as you represent in your last, to deserve your just resentmentsor complaints. J received your Worshipps dated the 12thinstant on the 14th, sentaway the canoe with aU the expedition l could, which was the next morning the15th, with I hope a sattisfactory answer, which 1 am sure your Worshipps willfind to be true, as soone as you receive Mr Vincents accompts, which I shall takecare to send, with slaves, pawnes &ca, as soone as ever the Gally arives, which Iwill not detaine an hour longer then needs must. She lyes now as I am informedat Pompony, three leagues off. As for the two letters your Worshipps mention Isent inclosed in my last, which 1 found accidentally scaltered in bis roome, yourWorshipps letter directed to the Generall of the Brandenbergs I sent away, 291and the other your Worshipps ordered me to deliver to some Dutch interloper, (1)delivered yesterday myselfe on board to the Captain myselfe, who promised mefaithfully to deliver the same, the Commanders name is John Dooves. I am veryimpatient for the arrivaH of the sloope, that your Worshipps may see all thingsfaithfulJy stated, and l may noe longer lye under your Worships displeasure forwant of a true information of things, and by the caUumnys of some. Soe hopeingyour Worships will, as I doubt not, give a favourable and impartial\ constructionto these. PS. 1 am informed by Captain Nedd, who was yesterday at Buttrew, that a friendof his, a Cabbosheer resident there, advised him that he had private intelligencefrom the Mina that the Generall endeavours by large promises of money toengage some of the Anta Cabbosheers, espectially them in and about Buttrew, toendeavour to hinder the resettlement of the Royall Companys fort and factory atSuccondee. Captain Nedd hath now 11 of his people in the Mina Castle, who lyefor one mark,292 which if your Worships pleases to (r]ernitt hither for thedischarge of bis the atforesaid people, bee promises to give his two sons for pawnes, untill such time as he hath repayed the said mark, and as soone as he receives his afforesaid people, he promiseth to undertake to gett people to rebuild the alforesaid fort. This is what Captain Nedd informes me. Dickes Cove, 25 July 1698136. Thomas Howard These are humbly to give your Worships an accompt of what timber and iron work I have sent by returne of the sloope: 27 sawed pieces which may be useful! for window cases, door cases or axell trees for great gunns. I have a great deale of timber of all sorts ready cutt, and should have had a great deale more if I had received the iron work sooner. Worthy Sirs, I have returned three old broaken crowes, two shovells. The Castle will in a short time be finished,293 except your Worships will be pleased to have a tank made, which if there be it will require a great deale more lime, for it is not convenient to leave the Castle without lime. An accompt of what iron work is wanting more, being needful!: 2000 of sixpenny and tenn penny nailes, three new trowelJs. PS. Humbly desireing your Worships will be pleased to grant me liberty to come downe soone enough to goe home in this shipp, otherways humbly desire your Worships to let me goe in the first ship bound for Barbadoes that presents. Dickes Cove Fort, 25 July 1698137. Richa rd Sheldo n The Gally came into this road the 24th instant. According to your orders I have sent you Mr Vincents things. I could not send them in his chests, he haveing sould it to Captain Ned sometime before his death, but have taken all tbe possible care I could of everything belonging to the afforesaid Mr Vincent. As for his debts I cannot as yett find out, but your Worshipps will as soone as you receive his desk, where I am informed all his accompts are inserted, both to white men and Black men, the key of which I suppose your Worships received before my arivall at this place, I found it safe locked and sealed. I have likewise sent one boy pawned by Captain Dickee for 12a as I am informed. Likewise two men and one girle slaves. He hath two more, whome the other night broke their irons and made their escapes, one of which runn to Captain Benns house at Buttrew, who promised to retume them both or money in two or three days time, which I shall take care to send downe the first opportun ity. Here lyes some Dancra traders in the towne who wait for goods, therefore humbly desire your Worshipps [to send] a supp ly of sheets, pewter and brass, and what other goods your Worshipps thinks convenient the first opportunity. I am informed of more traders coming downe, soc hopeing your Worships will find all things here answer your expectation. PS. lnclosed are the invenlorys &ca received this day from on board the Cabo Corso Galley, Mr William Hipps'ly master, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England (vizt) 50 gallons of rumme , 26 large nicconeese, 57 nanow ditto, one hand aw, 2 mawles, 6 wedges, 1 plaine, 1 chizwell [= chi el], 1 augor. 138. Richard Sheldon Dicke Cove, 26 July 1698 Affter the slaves and goods &ca of Mr Henry Vincent were put on board, and the Gally ready to saile, Captain Dickie brought the money, vizt 12a, which he sayes is all the boy lyes for, and desired me to ta.Ice the money and send your Worshipps, which I have [sent] by the master of the Ga.Uy. I keep the boy in the fort untill such time I have your Worships orders to release him. 139. Richard Sheldon Dicke Cove Fort, 27 July 1698 The Se1jeanl this day [came] to ask of me leave to goe downe to Cabo Corso Castle, whome not haveing your Worshipps order I refused, oe that if he doth come your Worshipp may a ure yourselves is without leave or consent. This I thought my selfe in duty bound to acquaint your Worshipps. Worthy Sir , I doe humbly acknowledge my selfe extTeamly oblidged to your Worships for my present advancement to this place. I de ire you'! excuse my not returning my humble thanks for the same before, the conceme at the first Jetter being the reall cause. PS. This day the Cabbosheer of Buttrue canoemen with severa.11 of the canoemen, with their wives and children, came to desire to live under the protection of our fort. The rea on of their leaving Buttrew they say to be the ill usage they received from the Dutch. 140. Richard Sheldon Dickes Cove Factory, 29 July 1698 Those two canoe men are as I am informed Mr Vincents deceas'd pawnes. 294 The canoe [ms. 'canoemen'] belongs not to them but to another man in the towne, which pawnes if your Worships designes to keep at Cabo Corso Castle, untiU they have sattisfied Mr Vincents debt, bee pleased to send away the canoe with the next. The felows desire to work it out, as they say Mr Vincent intended they should, who imployed them constantly , as he had occation. I had sent them downe in the Gally wi.th the slaves, but I had sent them before, with Peter295 and my letter dated the 18th instant to your Worshipps, who arrived here the 27th instant, with yours dated the 25¡', which I received and acquainted Captain Nedd of your Worships answer to this pallaver. Likewise [aquainted] the Anta Cabbosheers of what you mentioned in your last. I desire your Worshipps to send with the rest of your goods you designe for this place, red cloath, corrall and knives. Captain Benn not performing as before advised your Worshipps of sending the slaves or money in two or three dayes time, I sent and panyard one of his wives, a free woman, who is now in the fort. Wee are all here qujet at present. PS. I have sent the bagg that lay in his roome, which was forgott. Dickes Cove, 30 July 1698141. Richard Sheldon Affter I had wrote and finished my letter yesterday to your Worshipps, and just ready to send away the canoe, espyed two shipps comei ng downe, soe that I defered sending untill such time that I could be informed what they were, and what news to informe your Worshipps, which proved to be Portugueze, one an indifferent large shipp, and the other a small one. The Captain of the large shipp delivered a letter to me directed to your Worshipps, which is inclosed, 296 the other hath another which the Captain is desireeous to deliver himselfe. The Captain of the great shipp informed me, who desired me privately to acquaint your Worshipps, that he hath several! ill effected persons on board, corrupted by a superior officer, who have combined together to seiz[e] and carry away the shipp, which said persons in order thereto did last night attempt the life of the he being very sencible of their roagury, desires yourCaptain. Therefore Worshipps to secure the shipp, it being a Companys, 297 as soone as he arives, which shall be in a day or two's time. He sayes they had dismounted the gunns from off the quarter decks, and had certainly shot him had he not bad notice given him by some of his men. Dickes Cove, 21 Aug. 1698142. Richard Sheldon Yours of the 5th and 15th instant I received, and according to your Worshipps orders of the 5th instant, have enquired concerning the canoe men, pawnes to the deceased Mr Vincent, and am informed they were pawned for four ounces, (vizt) one for one ounce eight angles, the other for two ounces eight angles, which last was pawned by Captain Nedd for the bendy he borrowed in money of him, soe in persuaace to your orders will use them as I am informed he did. Wee hear the Generall of the Mina is at Shuma, and Peter Passop was two dayes agoe at Buttrew .298 There be severall canoes goes downe to the Mina from windward. WiUiam Coboume arived here yesterday with the 5 hand canoe and nailes. According to your Worshipps orders have sent Mr Thomas Howard with the afforesa:id canoe. The Gally is not yet arived. If your Worships have occation for come, as I hear it's scarce to leward, beleive could furnish you with 100 chest in a little time, or what you have occation for, at 2a per chest. [gap in correspondence, Sept. to Dec. 1698] 143. Benjamin Curteis299 Dickes Cove, 1 Jan. 1698/9 Yours by the sloop have received, with the sundrys therein mentioned, and have dispat[c]hed her as soone as po ible could, with the surveyors accompt inclosed of what timber, bricks &ca is pun on board. Also have sent by Capt. Willson 300 30 chests of come, and my accompts for the last month, wherein your Wor hipps will find two persons unpaid, whose names and dues are as foot appear . The 10 slaves likewise on board. John Barker carpenter  8oz  la  9t  Anthony Gu.ilding  5  3  9  144.  Benjamin Curteis  Dickes Cove, 22 Jan. 1698/9  Yours I received with the letters from Europe, and have according to orders weighed the beads, and find them containing 210 lbs. As death putts an end to all subblunary affairs,301 oe I doubt nott butt itt was the entrance of my deceased masters soule into eternall happyne s. I being att this juncture very ill of a feaver humbly intreat you to pare me a dozen bottles of beere, and in soe doeing that will very much oblidge [me]. 145. Benjamin Curteis Dicke Cove, 8 Feb. 1698/9 I have sent Samuell Ward, and likewise one Anthony Guilding, who is a lame infirme man, and ha the pal ie in his hands, and not fit for service. I have paid him two months pay, and what remaines due to him you have the accompt, January 26th 1698/9. One Hannce Jackson souldier dyed [ms 'dyet'], haveing left nothing behind him. I humbly pray when you shall think to send others in their roome. I have noe bandileers nor cartouch boxes. I hope to send my accompts up in a weeks time, but at present am soe weak, both in body and intellectualls (haveing been light headed mo t part of my sickness), and now uncapeable. 146. William Cobourne Dickes Cove, 8 Feb. 1698/9 These are to certifie you that I have assisted Capt. Williams302 all that lay in my power, but as for the timber boards and plank you wrote for, here is none ready yet for our carpenter, and three of our sawers has been sick ever since before Capt. Willson went from hence. The carpenter and one of the sawers are not yet able to work, the rest shall be kept at sawing soe soone as Capt. Willson is gone hence,303 for while any ship is loading here the slaves are all imployed about her, but shall endeavor to get both the timbers, planks, boards and knees ready with the ribbs soe soone as possible, but wee can cut noe more timber then what is already falled, till you send us a grindstone, as the master of the Gally can very well sattisfie you. Four girders under writen were sent to Commendo per Capt. Willson. Wee are in great want of lime, and have seaven doores and sixteen window shutters lyes downe for want of hooks and hinges. Wee want some ragg bolts304 to pinn the ax.ell trees to the carryages. I have pinned them with wood pinns very often, and every time they are fired they break, and the fall of the gunns upon the pavement does much damage. The iron work I humbly begg you will please to order as soone as may be, for when the carpenters are building the Gally they will wholy imploy the smiths shopp.305 PS. Sent to Commendo per Capt. Willson 4 girders, 2 of nine foot and two eleaven foot long. I have sent two maules, three hammers, one shovell to be mended, which I humbly intreat may be mended and sent up. Accompt of Gunners stores wanting gunn powder cart,idge paper 12 fatham inch rope for halliards 3 or 4 small spung áheads, 2 sheeps skins 3 or 4 small rammer heads, 100 spung nailes. 147. William Cobourne Dicldes Cove, 15 Feb. 1698/9 These are to certifie you that the knees and ribbs of the Gally are all ready, and as soone as I can I will get ready the plank and boards. There are 24 of the great joyces ready, and as soone as I can I will get ready all the rest. One of our sawers being a pit man is still sick, soe wee can keep but one saw at work, which is a great hinderance to our work. Pray send us what things is ready before advised of, especially a grindstone. Money being very scarce at Dickies Cove, and withMr Curteis and I haveing six month sallery due, I humbly intreat your Worshipsto send it up to me by this conveyance. Affter the death of Mr Sheldon 1 laiddown some money upon the Companys accompt for a pallave r about the slaves,as also canky money to the same canoe as the Serjeant paid the canoe hire,which amounts in all to 3a 9t. I desired Mr Curteis to pay it and he told me Imust write to your Worships, for he had noe order to concerne himselfe with anything done before he came. I am indebted to your Worships for twelve gallons ofrurnme, which I desire you to deduct from the sallery, and send the remainderand the 3a 9t to me, and in soe docing you will very much oblidge [mel. 148. Benjamin Curteis Dickies Cove, 16 Feb. 1698/9 I have sent my last months accompts and have discharged all old arrcares. I havepaid likewise the last two months sallery due to the 27 January to each person,except four hereunder mentioned. Pray please to send me some pewter two and 3lb basons, one cask of knives, for these here are not vendable, as also a littlegunnpowder and cartridge paper, and some to write on, for I have not one sheetleft. I humbly thank your Worships for the wine, which am of opinnion did me agreat deale of good. Scrjcant Hust John Baker Abraham Gibson Emmanuel! Fcmance [PS] Pray please to send me more souldiers, for we have very few and thosesickly. 