IX TANTUMKWERI/QUANSA'S CROOME Tantumkweri ('Tantum Querry ' etc., nowadays Tantum) , is 27 km ea t of Egya (18 km east of Amisa); in the 1690s it was al o known as 'Quansa's Croom [Kwansakrom]', after the name of the local ruler. An agent of the RAC did some trade at Tantumkweri in 1682, and left goods there, perhap with the intention of establishing a factory, but the e were evacuated hortJy afterwards.' However, a claim to the place was maintained; in 1687, when it wa repot1ed that the French might try to settle at Tanturnkweri, it was claimed that it 'belong[ed] to the Royal Company' .2 A factory was established there in June 1693, during one of the gaps in the Rawlinson correspondence. 3 Five letters from the factory are recorded from August to October 1693, but it was then abandoned , evidently owing to the disappointing level of trade . During this hiatus in the Engli h presence, in 1697 the Dutch established a factory (Fort Leydsaemheyt) at Apam ('Apom'), 9 km ea t of Tantumkweri, 4 and thi served to revive the RAC's interest in the area. In December 1697 Quansa himself went to Cape Coa t to request the re-establishment of the RAC factory in his town (no.1155) , but elicited no immediate response. 1nJuly 1698, however, an agent of the RAC wa posted to 'Quansa's Croom', initially apparently for purposes of inteUig nee rather than trade, and the factory was fonnaJly re-e tabJished in the following month; it was till occupied when the Rawlinson correspondence tenninate s in Febrnary 1699.5 In 1693 trnde al Tanturnkweri seem to have been anticipated mainly in gold, though little was in fact obtained; but in 1698 it was initially envisaged rather as a soUice of corn. Tantumkweri was situated within the state of Fante. 6 In 1693, however, the authorities in Fante (or some of them) opposed the opening of trade there (no. I 053), presumably in order to protect the estabbshed places of trade in Fante (Anomabu, Kormantin etc.) to the west. Trade in 1693 seems to have been anticipated rather towards the east, beyond Fante territory; it is suggested that the establishment of the RAC factory at Winneba, east of Tantumkweri, in August 1693 diverted business which had been expected to come to the latter (nos I053--4). In 1699, however, when there were again hopes of trade in gold, it was traders from Akani, to the n01th-west, who were expected to bring it (nos 1062-3). 1050. Thomas Buckeridge Tantum Querry, 1 Aug. 1693 Jnclosed are my July accompts, the balance of which, being 3oz I Ian 4ta, have sent you per bearer. 1051. Thomas Buckeridge Tantum Query, 13 Aug. 1693 This morning Quansoe brought me a fetish weighing 9oz 6an, which I have taken in pawne for 35 English carpetts, wherefore desire to know how you approve thereof, for my future government in such cases. He also desires you will please to deduct one angle from the price of your perpetuanoes, for that several! people here carried away their money which have come with an intent to buy them, by reason they have thought them to dear. The trade I do not find to answer his large promises, haveing scarse taken any money this month, wherefore haveing this opp01tunity I thought proper to advise, and have inclosed sent you 3oz 4ta of gold in observance of your last. 1052. Thomas Buckeridge Tantum Quirry Factory, 4 Sept. 1693 Inclosed I have sent you my August [accompt] & ballance, being 2 ounces tenn angles and eight taccoes, per bearer, with one woman slave. On the 18th ultimo came to this croome a Bremon Captain with severaU of his people , who with Quansoe and the neighbouring Blacks had been taking fetishes from thence concerning trade, and is againe returned, promising to be back in less then a month.7 Quanso tells me that [t]his Captain hath been sent by severall great men of that countrey, some of whose boyes came with hjm to palaver concerning a trade with thi factory, which is now ended , and that on his second anivall he designes to inhabitt this place for the better conveniency of traders . Both Quansoe, whose endeavours are not wanting, and also the strainger hath given me great hopes of a trade, but what will be the effects I know not, nevertheless thought it not improper to advise. [PSJ Upon opening of thi bale of Turley carpetts I find twenty of them to be damaged. 1053. Thomas Buckeridge Tantum Quen-y, 30 Sept. 1693 Not finding the trade to answer either Quansoes promises or my expectations , these are therefore to excuse the want of my accompts, haveing not taken sufficient to defray the factory expense . All the palavers I have been told are false & of noe effect. I believe Quansoes intentions of bringing a trade to this place hath been obstructed by the several! great Cabbosheers of Fanteen & Acroome,8 which he seems to acknowledge , & that he doth not de ire a continuance of this factory since his endeavours have been frustrated, his greatest dependancyes (since Whinebah hath been setling) being upon the people mentioned in my last, who are not likely to returne , or the Companyes goods to vend. I have lately been importuned for dashees by some of these people, which without your orders I could do nothing in. Capt. Richard Bradshaw,9 by reason of strong currants and bad we[a]ther being severall times forced to anchor within sight of this place, was necessitated for wood and water, which rather then he should loos [ = lose] ground & be driven east I procured it him, though not without trouble & charges, also two chest s come, hopeing you will allow thereof. I have by this canoe sent one woman slave on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. 1054. Thomas Buckeridge Tantum Quirrey , 4 Oct. 1693 Haveing received yours of the 2d instant I presume to advise that Quansoe ( ince my last) has been urgent to have the Companyes concernes removed from hence, telling me that he has done what he can to procure a trade, but all to no purpose , wherefore he does not desire the goods should lye & damage through his means , but is willing to have them withdrawn, when I hall have your order , so that if upon Capt. Bradshaws returne to leeward you shall cau e him to anchor here [I] shall be able (without any great trouble) to put them with my self on board him . He seems much discontented at the settlement of Wynebah, to which & the great prices of goods he wholy imputes our discouragment, but what to think thereof I know not, for I do not find any one of his palavers to be true, I believe he does what he can to obstruct them, & he does not want [i.e. lack] some to do as much for him, which with the skirmishes his people and the Accrooms have of late, wherein there is one or other k:illd, occasions the country people not to come down, as fearing to have their money or goods paniard, and for them near the water side they are poore & therefore no traders, except with interloopers & for dashees, as there is no trade. Quansoe himself doth not seem to desire neither have his people made any certain demands, but have given me to understand that, [I] haveing been here upwards of 4 months, they did expect somethfog as customary at the settlement of any factory, so that they leave it to your pleasure, but I do not think the encouraging them therein will be any means of trade. PS. Quanso sayes there are great designes in hand to disturb my cousen, 10 and that the Accrooms Cabbos heers have taken 7 bendyes from the Quamboers to assisting therein, 11 wherefore your expedition in sending of gunns [i.e. to Winneba] may be a means to secure their footing in dispight of any opposition. Here are at Lagoe 12 two very good 5 hand canoes to be sold, but not under 2oz 3an each. 13 * * * * * 1055. Benjamin Hewlett Quansaw's Croome, 10 July 1698 As it is my duty to acquaint your Worshipps with all bad designes that the Dutch hath against us, which one being acted on Satterday the 2d of this month, by the Dutch at Apom. Mr.Thomas Buckeridge,14 haveing a Little business at Quansaws Croome, sent one of the Companys slaves, which was sett upon by the Dutch and killed, 15 which has been so much a discontent to Quansaw, that he have strove ever since to lay wait, to gett the murderer of the slave, which he have performed at last, and have in irons at his croome. The Cabbosheers at Accrom would humbly begg your Worshipps to give them the priviledge for to tume the Dutch out from settJeing at Apom, they saying [ms. 'say in'] that your Worshipps are sencible the Cabbosheers of Accrom and Quansaw took a fetish that if the Dutch should anyways molest our boys that they would be both as one, and moreover for to right us, which they [ = the Dutch) have now done by killing our slave. They have not only done soe, but they have sent money to all the Cabbosheers hereabout for nott lett us ettle here, but they would not take it. Then they sent that money to the Quambores , but they would not take it. Befor they send to Quamboe, Quansoe would desire your Worshipps to send him a little liquor for to give the Quamboes, and if that your Worshipps would have them for to molest the Dutch, for to send him a little liquor for to make a pallaver for to know who will assist him against the Dutch . Soe noe more, but dayly endeavouring for to find out the mallice of the Dutch. 1056. Benjamin Hewlett Quansaw's Croome, 13 July 1698 Jtt is the desire of Quansaw for to acquaint your Worshipps that the Dutch are building their fort at Apom, but it is contrary to all their desires that live hereabouts, therefore they would desire you for to send some white men for to stay here, and they will turne the Dutch out from settleing [t]here, 16 for they [= the Dutch) make very sure pall avers till that they can gett their gunns there. Qnansaw came this night from Apomm , from makeing a pallaver about the slave the Dutch Copeman did sett his boy for to kill. 17 Therefore the Fantines and Accron and Mumford 18 people would desire your Worshipps for to send them something as encouragement, and they will be sure for to doe as your Worshipps please, for they say that if your Worshipps doe not take this opportunity your Worshipps will not have the like againe. PS. But they cannot make any pallaver without a I 00 bendys, by reason that they want the Dutch out from that place . 1057. Benjamin Hewlett Tantumquerry , 5 Aug. 1698 As I have continually found your Wor hipps my friends, soe I hope your Worshipps will continue, which makes me for to trouble your Worshipps for those things which I want, which are as follow , I being forced for to borrow some money of Quanza, which I hope your Worshipps will please for to send me some, for to pay that, and for to serve me till I sell that bquor which it was your Worshipps pleasure for to send me, and if that your Worshipps ervant may find soe much favour in the eyes of your Worshipps , for to end me a little beife and some chee e, to the quantity of Sa, by reason that things is soe dear here that there is noe buying of anything, and their weights soe unreasonable that it is uncredible to speak of them, and I would humbly begg your Worshi pps to send me a little pal me oyle, for to burne at night, for wee have not any in the croome for to buy, and Quansaw would desire your Worshipps to send him six ounces of tappseils. PS. Quansa would desire your Worshipps to send him four ounces worth of arrnes. 1058. Benjamin Hewlett Quanza's Croome, 8 Aug. 1698 Yours I received the 5th , and with the greatest express I could I have sattisfied your Worshipps, which according[ly] I have accomplished, and you may have itt [i.e. corn] according to your Worshipps desire. Sirs, Quanza was again for to buy four roles of tobaccoe, whereof he weighed three ounces [i.e. of gold], which I seing I caused him for to remaine and told him tha t if he would take tobaccoe, that your Worshipps would lett him have tobaccoe at that price , and [he] soe lett us have come for itt, which accordingly he will, and for the other goods he wants Dutch armes, and perpetuanoes, and sheets and tapseels. He would desire your Worshipps for to hasten away downe, as soone as your Worsh ipps can . PS. Quanza would begg your Worshipps for to send him some beife and some shugar. I would desire your Worshipps for to send me a little writeing paper, for upon the greatest occation that may bee I have not one bitt for to write to your Worshjpps, [and] a fatle sealing wax. 1059. Samuell Lawson Quanza 's Croome, 24 Aug. 1698 Since my arivall here on the 19th instant, did by a great deale of care gett all my goods ashore without any damage. I had according to your orders advised by first what condition the factory house here was in, had not the dayly expex tation of a pallaver about Appom with the King of Accroomes cozen prevented itt, 19 which was putt off untill this day, soe that I now I make bold to give you a full relation of them. As for the house it's ruined, and is nothing butt a heap of loose stones, and as for the other house that I lodge in, there is neither doore nor lock in it, butt what is upon my owne chests, except a low roome where the goods lyes, and that lock and door is soe mean, had I not such an honest Cabbosheer should be mightily atfraid the goods would be purloin ' d. With submission I think if you designe for to build a house for a factor here, with warehouse and other conveniencys for laying up of corne, it' best the house be raised by the water side . ow a to the pallaver wee have had w.ith the King of Accrooms cozen, about pushing the Hollanders from Apom , [it is] as followeth, that he hath sinceerly promised to effect it, provided you will butt order downe four of the Companys slaves to Wishue, where George Devonport is,20 and there Jen them reside purposely to lett the Blacks see you designe to settle a factory there . After that he will block them up , that they shall gett no manner of provitions into their fort , soe that he will force them to leave itt, soe that when all is accomplished he refers himselfe as well as Quanza to your usuall generossity. They both of them re ent ill the Hollanders , and doe think it is [omission] to have them in thi parts amongst them. For my owne part I have ornited nothing that might contribute or forward the thing, as well by present s as by necessary treats [which] I have given purposely to oblidge them, I have made a shift to gett quitt already of a whole case of Barbadoes rumme. Pray be pleased to send me recruits of the same sort, by retLtme of this canoe, for I am like to be at a large expence yett, by gratifieing the Cabbosheers that comes downe from the country , to oblidg[e] them in order to send downe traders here . As yett there is none come. What goods I have clisposed off are for come, for Capt. Daniells ships use, who thi instant arived here. 21 There is 115 chests come in since I have been here, and Quanza hath promised me the rest in eight days . He desires you to send me two bendy's worth of long gunns called snaphanses, two chests more of sheets, two bendy worth of the inclosed stuff. Pray Jett me know whither I may buy any slaves or nott, for Company's use, and what the prices of men, women, boye and girle are. PS. Three perpetuanoes and two says ha gott much damage in the shipp, I shall never be able to dispose of them. Capt. Daniell writes me from aboard that he will take noe more corne in then about 100 chests. I suppose you will order the re t to Cabo Corso. [gap in correspondence, Sept. to Dec. 1698] 1060. Samuell Lawson Tanotumquerry , 22 Jan. 1698/9 I have yours of the 7th instant, and for answer did putt aboard of Capt. Luke, 22 when here la t, for use of the Royall Company, two hundred & nineteen chests of come, and according to your order have gave him a quick dispatch, which I doubt not but he did me soe much justice as to make you acquainted with itt. Whatt come the Blacks bring in (tho' it is very inconsiderable), [I] keep buying of itt yett, untill I have your contrary orders. I think itt would be best if you send away the sloop23 to fetch the fifty odd chests of old come which lyes here, for I find itt decays much by lying longer. I am swishing24 the come roome floore, shall get itt done soe hard that when the come is turned itt will not gather dirt. Knives are of noe repute here, altho' I have offered 12 of them for la . Have paid Quanza his ground rent from the time I have been here, to the l 9th instant. Shall likewise for the time to come pay him 8a per month. I take notice you will send me also what goods I have formerly wrote for, which is well, butt since Capt. Luke spared me 20 barrs of iron for the Companys use when here, you need nott send butt 20 more. PS. Pay noe canoe hire if the fellows demand itt, for they came from your place this way upon their owne occasions, and offered their service to me in bringing this. 1061. Samuell Lawson Tantumquirry, 25 Jan. 1698/9 My last to you was of the 22d instant, since I have not been favoured with any from you. These are chiefly to cover the inclosed,25 which came to my hands about 5 a clock this morning and in complyance to his request doe send itt you by Occome, who is the expeditio us man about roe. I am at this instant loading of two canoes with come for Winneba, which shall goe from hence quickly and God willing be there against noone. PS. I have lately sent twice your boy Occame to Hurry Jaco of Accroome, who [=Occame] will sattisfie you about thatt affair with his answer. He [ =Hurry Jaco] concludes always he will doe itt, but when God knowes. 1062. Samuell Lawson Tantumquerry, 26 Jan. 1698/9 I wrote to you yesterday by Occame, who brought you a letter sent to me by Mr Thomas Buckeridge of Wirnneba, intimateing the Blacks designes upon him there, and of his apprehensions how they would storme his fort, whereupon by his order I dispatched instantly away two canoes with come from hence, which I hope gott safe to his hands, tho' as yett have not heard further from him, since which 1 have gott Arcanya traiders down hither (which occations this last). Quanza tells me they have gott a pretty considerable quantity of money along with them, Lhey want brass panns of the largest sort, if you have any of them pray send me six bendys worth, [and] pewter basons of four pounds, 2 lb, 3 lb weight to the vallue of eight or tenn bendys, ix chests of sheets, one bale of Welsh plaines, and twenty iron barrs. Plea e to advise how I must sell my pewter now. If you have nott a canoe ready thatt can bring all these goods by first then I i.ntreat you to send me as many sheets and pewter by returne of the bearer and by thatl canoe as Occome went up in as you can, and lett the others be sent as oppertunity serves. If you should exceed the quantity of goods I writt for, itt will not be detrimentall for I am assured there is a good par ell of money comeing downe by other traders, who will have occation for the same sort of goods. Pray jf you can spare Occame lett him come downe againe . My next shall bring you my monthly accompts. I send you herewith a man and a woman slave, which please to note in conformity with me. PS. I cannot send the woman lave which is mentioned by this conveyance, for when I came to take her away Quanza had carryed her out to rowsaw. 1063. Samuell Lawson Tantumquerry, 19 Feb. 1698/9 I have before me yours of the 24th and the 27th past, which please to pardon they were soe long unanswered, occasioned through inflameation which fell into my arrne, that hindered me as well from answering your letter as sending you my accompts for the last month .in course, which these now accompany, hopeing after you have found them right you will be pleased to pas[s] them in conformity with me. The fifty barrs of iron you mention I received from Capt. Luke when he was first here, you wilJ find in my December accompts last. I have made the factory debtor for them, a well as I have done in these accompts for 20 barr more received of him when last here. I received Lwo chests of heets, one pack of Welch plaines and fifty iron bares by the sloope as she was agoeing downe, and as shee came back I put aboard her fifty three chests of come for accompt of the Royall Company , which I hope came safe to your hand . I likewise received by the nine hand canoe four chests of sheets and five casks of pewter. The two souldiers and cask of granadoes I clispatched to Winneba with all expedition . Wee have had here not long since a discourse current that Affra Accu hee was certainly kiU' d by a Dancra man.26 I was with Quanza when the news was fir t brought to him, his means [ = mien] demonstrated , as well as his expressions, that he wa very well sattisfied with itt, for he said he deserved it long. He[= Quanza] has been very busie with the Arcany people who has been here some time since, butt they brought then noe money with them, for feare he should have taken it from them, upon which he gave them all assurances imaginable, that if at any time they came downe here to trade, they should not in any manner be molested in body or purse, by himselfe or any one else, the offender soe doeing should forfeit his head. Thereupon they exchanged fettishes together, and with such assureances they returned home in order to fetch downe money. He assures me there will be in a short time here a small trade, which God grant. Corne grows now scarce here, and I find by their mumbling they designe if they can to highten the price of itt. They will take now noe Companys perpetuanoes in baiter for it, pretending they are to deare, and the iron trade is now all over,27 soe if you give me not liberty to lett them have sheets, or what goods else I have by me in lieu of it, I am affraid shall not be able to purchase the 400 chests. I have now about 140 chests at Laggoe and here. I could dispose of 20 or 30 blankets for come if had them, soe if you please may send me them by returne of the canoe. 1064. Samuell Lawson Tantumquerry, 20 Feb. 1698/9 These are chiefly to accompany George Harvey, and to advise that I have put aboard his sloope for the use of the Royall Company, 53 chests of corne, which I wish safe in your hands. I hear noe further from Winneba, soe that I hope there is peace. 