X SHIPS As was noted in the Introduct ion, a considerab le number of the letters in the Rawlinson corpus (144 of 998 in 1686-8) were received from RAC vessels trading along the African coast (and in two cases, nos 901-2, from Barbados, in the West Indies) rather than from its factories established on shore. Many of these appear to be from vessels based locally in West Africa, engaged in coasting voyages to both east and west of Cape Coast Castle: characteristically , these were smaller craft, generally described as 'sloops ', though one is termed a 'pink'. 1 Only around half come from ships involved in trans-Atlantic voyages, which originated in England and would continue to the Americas. This distinction, however, is not entirely clearcut, since vessels based at Cape Coast sometimes undertook voyages to the West Indies (though returning directly to West Africa, rather than via England), and even ships from England often engaged in the coasting trade, turning back up the coast to the west after arrival at Cape Coast, before proceeding to the Americas. Moreover, the characte r of particul!lr voyages is sometimes difficult to determine in practice , on the evidence of the extant correspondence alone. 2 These letters received from ships sometimes supplement those sent by the factories onshore, but in other cases they serve to extend the geographical coverage of the correspondence , to areas where the RAC currently had no factories . Toparticular , there are several letters in this period from Beraku, in the kingdom of Agona, between Fante and Accra; and from the 'Alampo' (Adangme) country east of Accra. There are also generally sketchier references to trade by RAC ships on the coast to the west of the Gold Coast, in the areas known as the Grain Coast and Ivory Coast (though the latter term does not actually appear in the Rawlinson correspondence);3 and also to the east of the Slave Coast, , , including Benin , 't he Bight', Gabon and Cape Lopez. COASTING VOYAGES The James, Commander Richard Platt 829. Richard Platt [Cape Apollonia], 5 Jan. 1685 [= 1686] My humble servis presented unto you, hopeing in God that your Worship is in good health as we are all at this present writeing , praysed be God for it. These few lines is to sertifie your Worship affter that we parted from Cabo Corso we met with very strong current. We lay'd 4 dayes at the Cape Trees Punctas, tile currant running strong . We broak our small bower,4 our bouy being sunck, their was noe hopes of getting our anchors, and Mr Pearce and I thought it convenient to stand of the shoare and wee stud so far to the southward as Id 53m northward, and we fel I to windward ofCotterue 5 and we stoped at every place . Here is six sayle of Dutch interlopers , and them that I deal with all I make them goe out ofmy way. We have lost our carpenter, he deceased the 7th day of December. We had but small trade to windward of Cape Apelonia, but we have taken aboute six markes of gold; but we have scrubed our ship to goe to windward. 830. Richard Pears From on board the James rideing at Cape Apilonia , 5 Jan. 1685 [= 1686] This which comes to your hands by means of a Ffrench mans boate , being the first opertunity we have meet withall since our departure from Cabo Corso; this is to give you a short account of what trade we have had from thence to th.is place. We turned up along sh oar as high as Dickecove but took no mony, and finding it not possible by reason of the strong current to turne aboute the Cape, we stood to sea, and fell into windward of Cotterue. The first place of trade was Cap[ e] La hoe, where I bought about eleaven hundred weight of elephants teeth; from thence traded down along shoar, at Bassam , Ashenee , and other places , but found gold to be scarse and goods at very low rates. We have been here this six days and have taken in all six markes of gold. There is noe place of trade between this and Cape Lahoe but are ffimished with Dutch interlopers , here being noe less than three at present , besides a Ffrench sloope. Within a few dayes we design to sayle againe to windward as high as Bassam, hopeing we shall meet with a better trade at our next comeing down. The principle goods which sell here at present are Cal]Jetts, sheets, iron, pewter and knives. I shall lett slip noe opertunity to acquaint yow-Worship and Councell of our proceedings, and for the Companys intrest, noe endeavour shall be wanting of [Richard Pearse]. [On 28 Jan. it was reported to Sekondi that the ship had been captured by a pirate to the west (no.7). The Captain, Richard Platt, was given command of a Dutch ship also taken by the pirate (no.976). But Richard Pearse and some other members of the crew were put ashore, as follows.] 831. Richard Pearse Ax.im, 30 Jan. 1686 I imagine your Worship and Councell have had an ample information by those men already gon down to Cabo Corso how our ship was taken by the pyrate, therefore shall make noe further relation at present, these being only to acquaint you how we have been used, since he put us a shoar at Cabro, 6 about some two leagues from this place. As soon as the blacks brought us ashoar, they carried me and three more into the woods , where we remained three dayes before we understood what became of the rest of our men, then had we liberty to goe see them at the twone [= towne] , who greviously complain ' d of their heard usage, ours being rather worse then theirs for we had nothing but come and water for our ffood, and the cold earth for our lodging. Thus we continued nine dayes, hopeing to hear from your Worship, but haveing noe news, we were in a manner hopeless , the blacks threatening us every day, ifnoe ransome come speedily, to send us up into the cuntrey , and that we should neaver se salt water more . Then we desired to know of their demands , who at first askt four mark of gold, but at last came to six bendy's for us eight , whose names are under written; then by much intreaty , I came to this place to se if the Cheife 7 would disburst soe much mony to ransom us, but he sent a bla[c]k to make a palaver with them, who brought it to five bendy 's, charges included, and paid the goods to the value thereof yesterday, soe we remayne here ingaged for the same , which we humbly beseech your Worship to send with an order for our comeing to Cabo Corso, for which we shall ever be bound to pray. Richard Pearse, William Baran, John Webb, Walter Lloyd, Francis Nickson, Herny Clemens, Nicholas Wilson and John Boyce. [The men were eventually redeemed through the good offices oftbe Dutch, and taken to Mina, and from there to Cape Coast on 21 Feb. 1686 (nos 980, 982-4). The James had meanwhile been taken by its Dutch crew to the Mina, where the WIC recogn ised it as the property of the RAC, but eventually agreed to purchase it from them rather than to restore it (nos 978-80). As reported in this final letter, people were sent from Cape Coast to the Mina to try to recover persona l belongings from the ship.] 832. Thomas Price & Petter Clungeon A Mina, From on board the James, 31 Jan. 1686 These accompany's Joseph Colleenwood, whome your Worship was pleased to send up to se what chests, cloths &ca he could find which belonged to the ship before she was taken, which could not be counted stores, wherein he can informe your Worship that most of the peoples chests are on board and some beding, besides what is carried ashoar which he hath seen, and [they] are dayly canying small bundles, which we suppose they take out of the chest, which we have spoak to them of, but they make answer the pyrate gave it them, and if their were tens times as much more Ottr people should be never the better for it [In March 1686 the James, presumably now under Dutch command , sailed from the Mina to Accra (no.713).] The George Sloop, Commander Heury Wood 833. Henry Wood From Cape St Johns, 8 6 Jan. [16]86 Haveing this opertunity by a Dutch sloope of the Mina, I acquaint you of our proceedings. We have been all round the Bite and find noe trade, and am now bound for the Gabons, Cape Lopes, 9 and soe to the Coast againe, hopeing we may meet with a better trade than we have had heithe110 as yet. We have now on board ofus about seaven hundred pound of teeth. As [to] red wood we have some small matter. 10My mate Clay is run away from us at Whiddah, in the ship as was Capta in Minghams. The doctor went master. He has carried away one hundred and eighty slaves and bas signed to noe bills of loading. 11 Mr Obery 12 died at Wbiddah the 19th September, and the 2i" day I se the Pink well into the River of Arcadoes. 13 Our people here has been all sick, both whites and blacks, but now they begin to get up againe, all but John Hereford and the carpenter, they being very weak, but hope they will both recover againe. I here by this sloope as that [there] is an English sloop cast away at Papo, which I am heartily sorry for, and I hope that is none of ours. 14 834. Henry Wood [Sekondi] , From on board the Georg, 12 March [1686] This is to acquaint you as we arrived here the I I th of this instant, 15to give you an account as we have had but a bad trade all along, and likewise [= likely] soe to hold. We have about one thousand weigt of teeth , nor taken four ounces of gold sence we arrived on the Coast, nor likely to have a trade. We have been at every place of trade to windward but met with none. Haveing an ope1tunity by this canoe I thought good to acquaint you of all our affaires. My mate run away from me at Widdah with the ship of Captain Minghams. 835. John Hereford [Sekondi], 12 March 1686 After my duty present'd unto you, these is to acquaint you of our arrivall at Succondee and of our hard fortune this voyage , for we have not gott one thousand weight ofteath in all the Bite, nor one hundred weight of wax nor one stick ofredd wood, and since our arrival! on the Coast we have not taken 4o of gold, trading being soe bad, and a Dutch interloper at our heals all the Coast down and haveing fresh goods and selling soe cheap that we can hardly gett a canoe on board . [On 17 April 1686, Wood in the George Sloop was back at Sekondi, but due shortly to go down to Cape Coast (nos 25-6). He subsequently made a voyage to the west, as follows.) 836. Aron Slade 16 of[f] Axim, 19 May 1686 Persuant to your Worships order , the 2d instant about 10 a clock at night sett sail from the road ofCabo Corso, and on the st"ditto anchored at Dickecove , at which place took in wood and water and bought com for the voyage. The I gthmeet with Captain Pickard, to which time trading along the Coast have disposed of goods to the value of four marks and a halfe of gold. The remaining cargo proves bad in generall, shall use my utmost endeavour for disposall thereof. An accident bath happened to Evan Jenkins by fi.reing the brass gun, which broak, the truth I reffer you to the relation of Captain Pickard and his doctor, who hath been very kind and received him on board , with the carpenter, who hath been sick all the voyage and uesless. 837. Henry Wood of{f] Axim, 3 June 1686 My fir t was by Captain Pickard of[= off] Axin1 the 20th May. 17 The same day departed from thence, haveing the wind favourable for us, we arrived the 22dof May at Cape Appalonia about 4 a clock in the afftemoon and their meet with a ship that put out noe coulers . J histed out my cano and send my mate aboard of him to inquire what she was and whether[= whither] she was bound and what ship that was at anchor to windward of them . My mate comeing on board againe and told me that it was the ship as Captain Woodfi.ne meet to windward, and had 10 guns and 40 hands and was bound up the Grain Coast, and as be belong to the Mine, and in the morning he would se what ship that was to windward. Sunday the 23din the morning we waied and stood in for the shoare for conveniency of the canoes comeing aboard, and about 8 a clock he sayld to windward and about 11 a clock he was up with the other ship, and be waied also and they stood of tell one a clock and then they both boare away upon us. We being afraid oftbem, by reason my mate told me he was bound for the Grain Coast, I waied and made the best of my way from them , but the biggest hold us way. About 6 a clock at night one fyred two guns, but the other keept company with us tell 9 a clock the same night, then we lost sight of them and at 11 a clock we anchored of Axim and rod all the night ffollowing, and the next day we waied and bore as low as the Brandiburg forte, and their we lay for a trade , and the next day being Tuesday Captain Slade was taken very ill in all his bones and I would a came to Cabo Corso but he would [not?]. I askd the reason and he told me as Mr Whiteing had a great deal of anger in comeing down in Captain Levandelo , therefore be would not goe down, and a Satterday at 12a clock at night be dyed, and a Sunday the 30th May I bury'd him in the Brandyburg forte .18 I would a sent a cano down, but here is none to be had. He had received about 5 marks of gold before he dyed and he had taken none since, which I doe judge he gave your Worship an account ofby Captain Pickard before he died. 19 I have received almost 7 ounces for the Royall Company, which I shall give your Worship a just and true account of every dayes proceedings and saile of the goods. I shall take all the care I can to dispose of them for the best advantage tell I receive further orders from your Worship. I hope I shall be at Cape 3 Pints about a moneth hence, and then I shall send down our cano to Succondee for to here from your Worship, ifl dont here from you before. Captain Slade sold these goods , vizt. 14boysadoe-s 4 pintadoes 19tapseiles 21 paper brawls I I Beneen cloths 55 dozen knives 6 ffirkins of tallow 72 one pound basons 66 Turkey carpitts 4 lead barrs 7 Welch playns 3.barrells powder 20 Guine clouts 4 iron barrs This is all he sold for which I have receipts for. The carpitts proves bad, here is 24, all worm and rott [= rat) eaten and not worth one ounce. Sold myself in his sickness 2 tapseiles 2 barrells powder 4 carpitts I 2 I lb basons 5 playns I damaged say 16 Beoeen cloths Here is noe ship to windward but ourselves and a Dutch ship from the Mine. [In late June 1686 Wood was apparently at or near Sekoodi , since the RAC factor there transmitted a letter to him, but he then started towards Cape Coast Castle (no.39). In the following month, he was back on a further voyage to the west, as follows.) 838. Henry Wood & John Hereford [Komenda], from Oil board the Georg, 14 July 1686 Wee arriv 'd as high as the Mine a Satterday about 5 a clock, and coming to anchor the Mine fired a gun and put a weife [ = waif] 20 aboard on his flag staff. I thinging it was to me went ashoare in the cano; and no sooner was in the Castle but one of the canomen run away from me and l forced to hire a canoe to carry me on board, and since here be is at Commenda , but (I am] now lien becalm'd and no likelybood of any wind. I have sent the cano to acquaint your Worship of it. Mr Hereford has sent your Worship a great ffisb by Amo. 21 We here Mr Cross 22 is not well, and we hant had any trade as yett. 839. Henry Wood & John Hereford [Komenda], from on board the George Sloop, 20 July 1686 Meeten with the An Sloop at Comendo we have put all the mony on board as we have taken since we have been from Cabo Corso, which amount to two markes and four ounces of gold, which I hope you will receive per the hand of Mr Innes, the bulce markd and seald as per margent.1 have also sent down Robert Dingwell, not being well and bad a desire to come to Cabo Corso. Mr Innes has spared me one of his hands, which is a Portugues, so as 1 am not at all the weaker by him. 840. Henry Wood & John Hereford Succondee, from on board the Georg Sloop, 28 July [1686] Wee a1Tived at Succondee the 27th of this instant,23 and understanding that Mr Chambers was goeing down to Cabo Corso thought good to acquaint your Worship and the rest of the Councill of our proceedings . We have sent down per Mr Innes two mark, four ounces of gold , and we have received since one mark , five ounces or thereabouts, which we doe intend to putt ashore at Succondee , by reason we dont think it safe to send per Mr Chambers by reason he goes in a two band cano and puts on shoare at Comenda. 841. Henry Wood & John Hereford From on board the Georg Sloop, oflf] Butteru, l Aug. 1686 I received your Worships dated the 30 July, and according to your Worships order we have given you an account of our proceedings. We have anow [= enough] of all sorts of goods as yett only [= except] one pound basons, they be all gon. As for the Negroes they dont ask for any other sorts of goods but what we have. We have left with Mr Bucknell24 one mark, four ounces, and 6 angles, which is all we have taken since we sent down the ruony per Mr Innes, which was two mark, four ounces, which I hope your Worship bas received. We are endeaveriog to gett to Dickecove to corn and water, then to make the best of our way to windward in hopes to meet with a better trade there than here. Our wooden owrs [ = oars] stands us in great steed, for we hant no land breas nor no good sea breas. 842. Hem-y Wood & John Hereford near Dicke Cove, 11 Aug. 1686 Here arrivd Captain Brandfill the 10th this instant, which per him we render your Worship an account of all our proceedings . We have bin this 13 dayes and have not gaind a mile to the westward, and God knows when we may . We have no land breas nor sea breas, but the wind lyeth between the W. and W.S.W. , a very strong leward currant. As for our trade is very bad as yett. Them goods as we sell here as green playns , powder and narrow tapseiles , knives , and lead bam, for which goods we have sent your Worship one mark, two ounces of gold, as we have received here, which per Captain BrandfieH we have sent it to your Worship, which we hope will safl.y come to your hands. We have overtaken a Dutch sloop that is bound up to Axim and has been eleaven weeks from the Mine and cant gett about the Cape, 25 so our indeavours shant be wanting to gett to windward. 843. Henry Wood & John Hereford Butterue , 23 Aug. 1686 This by our own cano. We give your Worship advise ofour proceedings and what mony we have taken sent to your Worship per bearer John Mullett , which is two mark and three ounces and ten angles, which we hope will come saffe to your hands. The occasion of sending the cano is for more rangoes , for we have sold all we had, one great and one small string for one angle, and much adoe to put the small of. We have sent your Worship per Captain Brandfeild ten ounces of gold, which we hope your Worship have receive d. We want no other goods. I desire your Worship would be pleased to send per the cano 30 or 40 ffathom of good rope to make bouy rope, for our cables are very bad and I am affraid we shall loose our anchor. Our boatswain being very sick desired to goe to Cabo Corso, and we have put him on board of Captain Dail. [PS] This is to inform your Worship that the Dutch at Butteru doe binder the negroes from tradeing with us, although we have sent up the cuntrey to them, and when they come down the Dutch seiz'd on them, and so for two or three dayes together. Here is one Dutch interloper and we here, and two or three more to windward. [The George Sloop, now commanded by Richard Hobbs, was dispatched from Cape Coast for Gabon in Oct. 1686;26 and was at Whydah taking in slaves in Dec. (no.821 ). In June 1687 it was at Aboadi, between Sekondi and Shama, on its way back to Cape Coast (no.938). Later in 1687, now under the command of Joseph Blyth, it made a voyage to Barbados (nos 941-3). Henry Wood had meanwhile transferred to command of the Coast Frigate , which also sailed to Barbados in 1686-7 (nos 918-9, 975).] The Jacob Pink, Commander Richard Obery, then Charles Langley 844. Charles Langley & Jonas Perrin [River Forcados], no date These are to acquaint you that we are safly anived in the River ofBercadees, 27 which we must confest we have prolonged our time at Ardra by occasion of Mr Obreys sickness, who departed this life in Guidah roade the 19lhSeptember, and we say le from thence the 21st ditto. Mr Henry Wood, master oftbe George Sloope, came down before our departure, and the said Mr Obrey made him his executor, which the said Wood ought to make good all things are wanting, as your Worship will finde per i.oclosed. Likewise the said Woods vessell was forced to goe into the said river with us, where we were forced to stay with him 3 or 4 day es, because his ruther [= rudder] was loose, and we were forced to take him in and out of the said river for fear of ffurtber danger should happen to his vesselJ.28 This day haveing understood that a Dutch ship being aloft at the Boneen town, 29 and understanding that one of that ships men that was taken per Captain Levandelos ship to be on board the said ship, and that one of our men on board us, then belonging to the said Levandelo, was on board his ship at that time when she was taken , 30 and he fearing that the said Dutch man should do an ingury to him at his arrivaH at the Boneen, have discharged him and put him on board Mr Wood, and have received from Mr Wood Richard Jones in his roome. 845. [unsigned] from on board the Jacob Pink at Abbine, 31 20 July 1686 After my most humble servis to your Worship and Councill, in hopes these few lines will find you all in good health as we all injoy at present, but have bad a great deal sickness in the tenn of the voyage. These few lines is to lett your Worship and Councill understand that the 19September Mr Richard Obrey made his will to Mr Henry Wood and .left all that he had to him, and about 11 in the forenoon the same day he dyed at Quidda, so [the] 21st day [omission?] we got over tbe bar into the river,32 w[h]ere I stayd till the Ist October to assist Mr Wood with my carpenter to the mendinge of his rudder and [we] pparted, so the 12th day got the ship up river ofUmbrah, 33 w[h ]ere found that the Beeneens was at warrs with the other cuntrey people, 34 so cloths and teeth was very scarce, for the ffiddores 35 they would not Jet me have any trade for either cloths or teeth, till I had paid all customs and trnst'd sum goods to them, as I was forcd for to doe, 36 but have got most of the cloths in for the goods trusted by me as 1068 times and coldes 37 and 1285 womens cloth. [The Jacob Pink again sailed to Benin, and back to the Gold Coast in 1687 (nos 95, 260), but no correspondence survives from this second voyage.] The Adventure Sloop, Commander James Bailey [In Jan. 1686 Bailey was at Sekondi careening his vessel (nos 4-6, 8). He made a second voyage to Sekondi, to deliver letters and goods, in early Feb. 1686 (no. I 0). Later in Feb. he delivered goods to the Anomabu factory (nos 387-9); and in early March he was again at Sekondi (no. J6). Later in March and again in April he went east, to deliver goods to Accra (nos 713, 715). In May 1686 he was reported to be at Lagu, to purchase corn (no.717).] 846. James Baily Mumford, 28 May 1686 These are to sattisfie you that I am at this place and have endeavourd all I can at Barricoe and this place, but canot gett any come, winds being so fair westerly that I canot get up, and as to trade it is very bad, for I have not took any mony this 9 or I 0 dayes. Our leakes continue at the same rate, our sloop is so foule that we can hardly move through the water. I shall endeavour with all opertunityes I can to gett up. 847. James Bayly 3 July 1686 These are to acquaint your Worship that we are in great want of 20s and halfe crown nay I es for to bring two [= to] our sheathing, we want 500 of each . I desire your Worship to send us what you have on Munday morning. I fear we shall doe but little till they come, our tarr spends apace and beleive we shall want two barrell or more oftarr and a barretl oflyme and we shall be in want ofa boltsprit of26 foot long and eight inc[h]es diamiter, if your Worship have any conveyance to send it up here that it may be sent before we git out. 848. James Bayly 6 July 1686 That this bearer hath been abuseful l and I am not willing to take him any longer , and as for the nailes I have received yesterday about five a clock in the afternoon. I hope tbis day we shall compleat one side of sheathing. I desire your Worship that you will be pleased to send the lime and tarr. I shall want a halfbarre ll of palm oyl. Pray be pleased to send what sheaths, nailes and others you have by you. 849. James Bayly no date [Aug. 1686] Yours of the 29th instant [ received]. I have received from Mr Whiteing38 thirty men, 17 women39 and I have bought 5 men, 3 women, in all ffifty five slaves . 1 stopt at Barraco, coming down, but found no trade, but [they] said ifl would stay 7 or 8 dayes I should have slaves and money. I made the best ofmy way for Accra. At my comeing up I se a Pomiugues and Dutch sloop rideing at Barraco. There came not any cano to trade with me. Ever since makeing the best of my way for Cabo Corso. I have had the slaves on board 20 dayes, I have not above 6 or 7 dayes water for them . I receive d to windward of Accra about 14 ounces . I suppose them40 to be Accras, I have a five hand cano at my staro . There was not any 3 band canoe to be had at Lague and Mumford. There is great enquiery for tapseiles and longees if they be good. I fear we shall light of a long passage up, the wind being quite contrary. 850. James Bayly att Amersa , 4 Sept. 1686 According to your order have sent what slaves I have on board, that is twenty one women, five men. We doe what we can to gett up, we haveing not any wind to gett of or on the shoar, and a strong leward currant. I have not had a land breas to hold two bowers ever since I came from Accra. [After presumably returning to Cape Coast, Bailey was at Beraku on 18 Sept. 1686 (no.870), and at Accra, where he delivered goods, later in the same month (no.727). Early tbe next month he was at Alampo to the east, purchasing slaves (no.728); and later in Oct. he was at Accra, on his way back to Cape Coast (no.729). Early in Nov. he was at Komenda, landing goods and collecting the factory's gold takings, to take back to Cape Coast (no.191-2); later in the same month, he was at Beraku (nos 879-80), and then at Accra, from which he departed back to Cape Coast on 27 Nov. (no.735-6).] 851. James Bailey Mumford, 3 Dec. 1686 This morning wee lost the head of our mast lying att anchor with our maine saile up waighting for the land breeze. It brocke under the reging [= rigging] and all our shrouds and stays came downe. Wee have seaventy three slaves abord, whereof is fivety fower men and ninteen woemen, the men are very troublesome unto uss. Wee are getting up of our riging upon the stumpe, and hope to bee goeing this night if any land breeze. [After presumably deliveriug these slaves to Cape Coast, Bailey returned to Accra for more (cf. no.736).] 852. James Baylye 11 Dec . 1686 Wee are all in good health, with the slaves, and are in want of nothing. I have on board ffourteen men and seaventeen weomen. [Bailey presumably now delivered these slaves to Cape Coast, before embarking on a voyage to westwards. On 23 Dec. 1686 he was at Cape Apollonia (no.923), and then proceeded back eastwards, as follows.) 853. James Bayly Taccarado, 12 Jan. 1686/7 These are to acquaint you of our passage so far windward as Cape Apilonia in three dayes , where we found a strong trade wind with currant, and lay there 12 dayes in hopes of a slack but found it not abate. I endeavourd and stopt at all places of trade downward. I have not taken above three ounces all the way down besides mony for the rangoes I have sold them. All the blacks are all at warrs from Cape Appilonia to Cape Tres Pointas , inland people,41 and them by the waterside have not mony to lay out. By the badness of weather and a strong currant we broak our cable and lose our anchor two leaugues to windward of Cape Appilonia. He came in before us a French man of 12 guns and 70 men. [Later in January, Bailey went back to Cape Coast, calling at Komenda to collect the factory's gold (no.219). In February he was again to the west of Sekondi, but was reported to have failed to get as far as Cape Apollon.ia (no.71) .] 854. James Baily Commenda, 5 March 1686/7 These are to acquaint you of our return to this place, we gitting no higher then Cape Appilonia, w[h]ere we lay a considerable time in hopes to gett to Ashenee but could not, haveing a strong leward currant. The people at Apilonia being all routed and two dayes before we came away were returnd againe , they came on board ofus but had not any mony. I seing they had no mony , wayed and came down and stoped at all places of trade. No canos came on board ofus , all being at wa.rrs. I have not taken two ounces in my voyage. I spoak with two sbipps that did infonn me they found no trade at Ashenee. I stoped at Taccarado and went to Succondee to se if Mr Bucknell wanted any goods .42 He haveing no occasion for any , I came down to Cornmenda where I found a Dutch interloper with Frenc h coullers . Not any canoes hath bin on board of us as yett. [Bailey returned from Komenda to Cape Coast on 8 March 1687 (no.233). Later in the same month he was at Mumford (no.885), and then at Accra, from where he returned to Cape Coast (no.749 -50).] In April 1687 he was back east, at Anomabu , apparently delivering oystershells (no.516). In June he was at Accra, for where he set out on 18 June for Alampo , to purchase slaves (no.756).] 855. James Bayley ffrom on board the Adventure sloop , neer Alampo , 29 June 1687 I did not think when I sent the letter to MrWhiting (which I beleeve you have seen before now) that he had still been at Cabo Corso else should have given a farther accompt of my proceedings. I did to Captain Gould, whom I thought to have been at Accraa and to whom I was ordered by you to make my applications , but I was deceived in that likewise and received his letter back again from Mr Price, 43 as likewise another from you wherein you ordered me to advise Mr Whiting what quantity of slaves I have procured, which I did in the forrnenconed letter, since which time 1 have procured twelve which makes in all fifty, and thanks be to God all in good health . One of our canoe men I have left ashore at Alampo sick of the small pox and am forced to hire another in his roome , but when shal I gett up with you know not, the breeze continuing much out and leeward currants , cannot gett off. I have been 10 dayes from Alampo and have not gott three leagues of ground, and com, wood and water spends apace. My canoe goes for more com now, and by chance with much adoe and some cost have gott some water here, else should not have bad a drop to drink. My wood is allmost gone, and of that I can gett none. I could have gott more slaves bad I had sayes, red and green perpetuanoes, most redd, and good long clothes, for the bale I had from Gould was new packt and likewise turned [?=torn], as all my men can testifye, and so bad that they would not meddle with them till abated upon every piece. In your letter you order me to leave the slaves at Accra and there to take in what goods and corn I shall want, with which you have ordered Mr Whiting to supply me with , and with those goods to receive and purchase gold and slaves, but whither I must go down again or where I must do it you do not order me; I shall as soone as gett up make my applicaon to Mr Whiting, and ifhe has any furder orders from you to me I shall readily observe them, but if in the mean time you shall think it requisite to order him to send downe his canoes for the slaves then I shall want besides the goods that he has by him, sayes and knives, provided I am to go down. I hope I shall gett up before your answer, I shall strive to do it. [On 7 July Bailey came back west to Labadi, and visited the Accra factory to collect a supply of goods, with which he sailed back to Alampo on 8 July (no.758). Later in the month, Captain Robert Gould, in the Maynard, met Bailey at Alampo, and put one of his ship's guns onto the Adventure (no.760).] 856. James Bayly Adventure Sloop, Accraa 27 July 1687 This comes by the 11 hand canoe to give you accompt that on Munday, being the 25 instant, I arived att Accraa with 26 men , 22 weomen slaves, which according to order I putt as(h]oare here, and now lye only for further orders.44 I should have gott more slaves had not the canoemen played the rouge and runn away from mee. I stayed for them three dayes butt had no sight of them, although had verry fair weather to come of. Two of them are now come up heare with a story that the canoe is broake all to peices upon a rocke as came alonge shoare, the other stayes att Alampoe, soe that if you order mee downe againe I shall want a canoe and another canoeman , for he is so great a rouge , tis he that bath caused all this, the very Alampoe people complaines of him. I hope they wi IJsend him up, for since I cam[e] here there cam[e] a two hand canoe from thence with two slaves, which T have stopt upon his heade 45 and will keep them till you order the contrary if they doe not rettume him. Its bee that I was forced to hire a man in his rome for a month, pretending bee was sicke of small pox, which att my retturne I found to be nothing , soe I shall expect your orders what I shall doe with him if he comes. I received your letter at Alampoe, and received from Captain Gould two tonn of watter caske. Likewise he putt on board mee one of the gunns that was for Accra , which he would not stay to putt ashoare there. How I shall gett him out I know not, for my tackling will not hold to doe itt. I had his runners and tackle to gett him in, with rope to slinge him, elce could not have dont, and without you pleas e to send mee down _such things I cannot putt him ashoare but must carry him with mee where are[ = ere] Igoe. Here is a three hand canoe to be bought, they aske five pease for itt, itt may be Mr Whitting may gett itt cheaper, provided you like the buying off itt. [At the beginning of Aug. Bailey was still at Accra, awaiting instructions from Cape Coast (no.762-3) , and on 8 Aug. was dispatched west for Cape Coast, to deliver gold and slaves (no.764-5).] 857. James Bayly Adventure Sloop, 21 Aug. 1687 This comes by my owne two hand canoe to acquaint you that according to your last order I tooke aboard sixty slaves at Accraa , which have had on board now thirteen days, and have been from thence eleaven dayes, and not gott as high as Barracoe by two miles, the currant running strong to leward, and the breeses along shoare with calms, so that when I shall gett up know not, having been these six dayes and not gott three leagues of ground. When came from Accraa tooke aboard no more than fourteen chests of come (not leaving them so many), expecting to gett up where I could have gott more if occasion; but now have not above six days come aboard, and to send to Accraa tis in vaine, they having none to supply me withal!, and if this weather continues , wood and water will be wanting likewise, and where to gett it hereabouts know not, and besides if could have not a canoe to fetch it. Several! of the slaves have been ill but now, thanke God, pretty well recovered, only one woman dyed of the fflux the 16th instant. I thought it convenient to give you timely advise, that I might in time receive your orders and supply. In the absence of my canoe shall use my utmost indeavour to gett up as high as I can. 858. James Bayly Barracoe, Adventure Sloop, 23 Aug. 1687 By the 11 hand canoe I received your Jetter of the 2ih instant, as likewise six chests of come, water and yambs, as also a few coales, but wood will be our first want, having less than did imagine but hope shall have an oppertunity ere long to gett up, yett the currant runs stronger now than when sent up. According to your order, I sent up by the canoe ffifteen men slaves and ffifteen women slaves, being as many as the canoe would carry, and I hope the rest will continue in health as they are now. 859. James Baily Amersa , 3 Sept. 1687 Since the rettume of your 11 hand canoe, I have made shift by the help of a slacke currant, though small winds, to gett up to this place, but now the currant is made downe soe stronge that how long I shall stay here know not. It was on the 29th past I weighed from Barracoe , and the 31st ditto I ancored not a league from this place, soe my necessityes forces me once more more to beg your assistance, for I have not above four dayes corne , and hardly soe much wood, and verry spedily shall want watter , and besides my long passage causes three or four of the slaves to fall away very much, although they eate well and drinke well, what's the matter with them know not. This goes by my canoe as farr as Agga and from thence by land. 860. James Baily Amersa, 5 Sept. 1687 Your letter of the 4th instant have received this morning by the 11 hand canoe, by whom I sent the remaines of the slaves, being fifteen man and fourteen weornen, which with the weoman slave that dyed makes up the sixty received of Mr Marke Bedford Whiting, Cheife att Accra, and one weoman slave that I bought at Accraa just as your order came down to mee, soe that I did not putt her ashoare, which makes by this canoe fifteen men and fifteen weomen. This morning with a small breese and the currant being abated I weighed, but beleive shall gett but little today. I rettume you my humble thank.es for your kindnesses, but I hope now my absence will not be long, soe that I shall make a shift with what I have till I gett up. [Having presumably called at Cape Coast, later in Sept. Bailey went back to Accra, where he delivered supplies, before going on eastward (no.770).] 861. James Bayly ffrom on board the Adventure, at Mingo,46 26 Sept. 1687 These serves to acquaint you that in prosecution of your orders, on the 23dinstant I came as low as Pampara, 47 which is about 7 leagues to windward of Alampo (for I did not thinke it convenient to goe soe low as the Dutch shipp lying there), where I might have got slaves had I goods accordingly, which is sayes, blew and green perpetuanoes and broad tapseiles, for those that you put on board mee for broad proves to be narrow (and yet the bales holds no more then eighty pieces), which they will not looke upon. I have sent up a piece to Mr Whiting, whom I have desired to forward to you with this letter, which my canoes goes with to Accraa. I have made shift to purchase six slaves with such goods as I have, but theirs twenty gon away for want of goods. Some was for booges, but would not take 80£ and 90£,48 the Dutch man giving more. This day I fell downe to this place in sight of the Dutch man, hearing by my canoe, which sent here before, tbat they bad slaves. The allejarrs l cannot expect to gett of, for they will not looke upon them. Not else at present but humbly desireing your answer, and some supply of goods, without which can doe but little. PS. If at any time they should like the narrow tapselees I know not at what price they are rated at, therefore desire to know how I may sell them. [At the end of Sept., Bailey was reported to be still to eastward of Accra (no.773); early in Oct. be came west to Teshi , to deliver slaves to the Accra factory (no.775); and on 16 Oct. be was reported still to eastward of Accra, trading for slaves (no.777).] 862. James Bayly from on board the Adventure Sloop, 23 Oct. 1687 By a two hand canoe received yours of the I 8th instant, and according to your order shall make the best ofmy way up to Accraa, and there follow it both in takeing in slaves, and likewise puting ashoare what goods Mr Whiting demands, except the bale of tapseeles you mention, which shall carefully bring up to Cabo Corso, from when[ c ]e since my departure have purchased ffifty slaves, thirty of which are at Accra, the rest on board, and should have gotta great many more, if it bad not been for the Dutch mans says. [Bailey now proceeded to Accra , from where be departed, presumably for Cape Coast, around 31 Oct. (no. 781 )] 863. James Bayly on board the Adventure Sloop, off of Morea, 7 Nov. 1687 I received your letter, but being in the or:fing [= offing] with a land brease and a strong leward currant I shall not be able to seize the shoare nor fetch Annamaboe at present. I cam from Accra a Wednesday last, with twenty nine men and twenty nine weomen slaves, and one boy. Mr Pepperell49 was to come away the Ffiiday following, I expect to see him every minute. [Having presumably delivered these slaves to Cape Coast, Bailey was back at Accra in Dec., to collect further slaves for delivery there (no.789).] 864. James Bayly From on board the Adventure Sloope, in the roade ofCabo Corso, 12 Jan. 1687/8 I have received your orders, and shal I as soone as the wind presents, ffol low them, in the ffirst, and when arrive at Comen da in the last, but beleeve my passage there will not be soe speedy as may be expected, the currant being broake , but shall use my utmost endeavors to loose noe time. [Bailey was ordered to Komenda on this occasion to assist in the evacuation of goods from the RAC factory there; the Adventure sloop was at Komenda for this purpose on 15 Jan. (no.313); and was again ( or still) off Komenda on 8 Feb. (no.321).] 865. James Bayly Comenda, 11 Feb. 1687/8 Your orders I received this mo ming and shall performe it in every perticular as neere as I can. I likewise received tile powder, shott and every thing exprest therein. 50 There are two ships now in sight under saile coming downe, but what they are know not. 866. James Bayley From on board the Aventure Sloop, 5 March 1687/8 These are to informe you that I was tak.en suddenly ill 4 days since, but was in hopes I should have gotten over it, but find to the contrary, having had an exceeding strong feavour this 24 hours, with great paine in head and hart. Doe humbly crave your worships would be pleased to order mee down to Cabo Corso, that the docter may be helpfull to me, if it be the will of God. 867. James Bayly Comenda, 31 March 1688 This morning arrived here the Alligattor sloop, Mr Jeferyes (but the Ann is not yett arived), by whome I understand I must goe to Succondee, but understand likewise there is noe canoes ordered to carry out our anchors, when come there, neither am I in a condition to goe there , haveing but a cable of forty fathom, and that broake the other day, nor have not a booy roape thats good for anything for our ancors, nor barrells to booy up our cables, which must be used to save them from the rocks or elce shall be cutt adrift, six of which will serve. As for a cable I canot go without it, the old one being broke to peeces, since rid here. I likewise want 4 fathom of four inch shroude hasser 51 to make straps for our blocks, to heave downe by. I will make the best of my way up to Succondee when the goods are out, but can do nothing when come there without the things above mentioned, There is buts to make the carpenters stages, nor I know not what I shal I do with the 1,'feat gunn that I tooke out of Captain Gould, for cannot careen with it in. [The Ann evidently arrived at Komenda later on 31 March, and the goods evacuated from the Komenda factory which were on the Adventure were now transferred to the Ann, and the Adventure and the Alligator departed for Sekondi (no.331). On 19 April 1688, Bailey left Sekondi again for Cape Coast (no.140).] The Ann Sloop, Commander Hugh Hilling [The Ann Sloop was employed between Jan. and July 1686 in voyages to Komenda and Sekondi (nos 8, 10, 16-17, 24-5, 43, 150, 156,169 , 839), but seems then to have been commanded by a Mr Jones, who in July was rep01ted ill at Sekondi (no.42). Hugh Hilling , formerly employed in the Sekondi factory, had assumed command of the Ann by Aug. 1686, when he undertook a voyage to the east, as follows.] 868. Hugh Hilling From on board the Ann Sloop in Barrocoe Roade, 1 Sept. 1686 Accordi11g to your order 1sayld as low as Accra and deliverd to Mr Whiteing the good[s] consignd unto him from your Worship and rest of the Councill and took his receipt for the same,52 and I arrived here at Barracoe the second instant [sic] and found the Mine sloope tradeing here for gold and slaves, and I am inform' d per the Capushers that the Coopman of the sloope hath made a pallaver with them about building a house here, but this[ = their] answer was that it did belong to the English and that they would not consent to anything before they did acquaint your Worship and the rest of the Councill with it. The Generali of the Mine hath sent them a dashee here, one green perpetuano and a halfe, and make them a great many fair promises . I have taken since I have been here two marks, four ounces of gold and three men, three women and one girle. I have sent per my cano one matchlock musquett of the same sorte that are vendible here. lfl had two or three hundred I should sell them in a shorte time, for here is a good trade at present. If you think fit to supply me pray send per first opertunity some green and blew perpetuanoes, sheets, broad nicconees, broad tapseiles, for my green perpetuanoes are all gone and most of the n.icconees. lfyou have any good berba longees they will goe of. I desire you if you think ffitt to spare me another whiteman. [Hilling was reported still at Beraku, 11 Sept. (no.725).] 869. Hugh Hilling From on board the An Sloope rideing in Barracoe Roade, 14 Sept. 1686 Yours received per seaventeen hand cano , per which I received one hundred broad nicconees, twenty five blew perpetuanoes , fourty green ditto. Likewise I have deliver 'd to Ffrancis Dormer four men, five women , one girle. I would have sent a letter by him , but they would not tarry my writeing. I followd the cano in the evening as high as Lague , but not finding tbem I put ashore at Mumford to se about the com that is due, and will be readdy at four or five dayes warning. 1have taken four marks, one ounce, ten angle s and six taccoes of gold and I have bought one man , one lusty lad and one girl more. I desire you would be pleased to send me some sheets and musquetts, broad tapseiles , lead barrs, white pautkeis, and likewise the price of tapsieles and pautkeis, and likewise some powder, about twelve or ffifteen barrells in whole , half and quarter barreils. l desire it may be good, for I have two barrels and a quarter of the last that lyes on my hands, for powder and musquets are a great commodity here , for they doe expect to fight the Acron gs within this two months. 53 As concerning tbe Dutch their building a house here, they would very willingly doe it, but the blacks will not consent to it, as far as J can understand . The Dutch does give the traders one angle in the bendy custom , as they call it, and bestow plenty of brandy upon them , but to what end I know not. As for a dashee , what your Worship thinks fitt will joyfully be expected. Here are five of them that speake s Engli sh, and they all expect a like. I desire your Worship to send me two or three anchors of rum and two or three skeines of twine if possible you can gett any. Atta Barba 54 presents his servis to your Worship. 870. Hugh HiUing From on board the Ann Sloop in Barracoe roade , 20 Sept. 1686 Yours received by Mr Baily the eighteenth instant , [ with] ten barrell of powder, six whole and eight halfe ; ffifty bars of lead; one hundred white pautkeis; thirty blew ditto; ffifteen narrow tapseiles; two quarter casque of rum; three chests of sheets; sixty nine matchlock musquetts, and one that J sent up makes seaventy; twenty five fl.relock ditto ; also one scarlett cloth. Concerning the settleing a white man ashore, they demand two sayes , half a barrel! of powder , one ankor of brandy , a[nd] likewise a green perpetuanoe; and they doe likewise promis great care they will take of the white man and what other things your Worship shall intrust in their charge , and doe pro mis that the Dutch nor any other shall have any settlement here but whom your Worship shall order, and will take a :ffi.tish for the same. These things I am obliged to deliver to them this night, and hoyst a flag in token of our settlement. I have sent according to order my gold, which is five marks as in margent (mk 5). Likewise á I have sen[t] one man, one boy, one lad, three women , which is all the cano could take in. The Dutch profferd five sayes and other things to settle here , which they doe deny. 871. Hugh Hilling Barracoe , 29 Sept. 1686 The occasion of my writeing is to desire your worship t.o send me these goods ffollowing, as powder, white pautkeis, green perpetuanoes, and redd stript ginghams, and sheets, blew pautkeis , with the prices thereof , desireing your Worship to send an order for to bring up the damagd powder, for I have three whole barrells, four half, one quarter , which will not sell, and likewise to send some musquets of the same sort you sent before, matchlocks . I have nine men , seaven women slaves , and two marks of gold. I desire your Worship to dispatch these goods, with all expedition. The Dutch are very incroching and doe intrud[ e] themselves into the Cap ushers company with promises of great reward if they will give leave to their settlement, but they will not as far as I can understand . Per the next opertunity I will give you advice farther. 872. Hugh Hilling Barracoe Road , 3 Oct. 1686 Yours received by Captain Peter, of whom received these ffollowing good[s], forty green and redd perpetuanoes; six whole , eight halfe barrels of powder; fourty matchlock musquets; two hundred and fourty blew pautkeis; ffifty stript carpitts; twenty ginghams; seaventy two white pautkeis . Likewise I have sent back by Captain Peter the bad powder, which is three wholes , three halfes and one quarter barrells of powder , and likewise two marks, five ounces, four angles and six taccoes of gold, and ten men, seaven women slaves . The people ashore has againe confirm' d their promis to me, about the Dutch not settleing here, but they say they are very sorry that their old masters will not doe by them as the Dutch would, which is to give one angle upon a bendy, which to incourage them I doe give, but if not allow'd I must pay myselfe, which I hope your Worship and the rest of the Councill will take in consideration. As concerning the charge your Worship hath been pleased to intrust me with, I shall have a dilligent care thereof and shall doe my utmost indeavouring for the in[t]rest of the Royall Company 873. Hugh Hilling Barracoe Road e, 11 Oct. 1686 This accompany 's John Pound in the seventeen band cano, which will acquaint your Worship that the Dutch has hoysted their fllag here by the order of Atta Barber , but there was none of the Winaba Cabushers would consent to it. The Dutch man gave to Attabarba and some of his ffollowers one quarter casque of brandy, and told him that the Coopman and ffizcall of the Mine should come down and make the pallaver and bring workmen with them to build a fforte, but as far as I can understand the Queen bath not consented to itt.55 Trade is somewhat dead at present by reason their army are in the feild and doe expect to fight every day. 56 The queen has sent down for a white man to come up and speak with her about our pallaver. I have taken one mark, one ounce of gold and bought 3 men, 3 women slaves, and doe expect a good trade very suddenly. I desire your Worship to send down a fflag, if you think it convenient. The last caske of sayes that I opend was wormeaten, and there is 7 of them will not pass at the price currant. I desire your Worship to send some sayes by the first opertunity. Bryan Ingle doth desire your Worship that I may be his paymaster, from the sixteenth of July unto the eight of October. 874. Hugh Hilling Mumford, 25 Oct. 1686 These are to acquaint your Worship that I finding little trade at Barracoe , I came up to Mumford, and in our comeing up we broak our rudder of at the upper pintle 57 and lost the lower part of him, and likewis e the lower gudging [ = gudgeon]. l have sent up the dementions for makeing a new one , the longest peice of twine is the distance between the suppe1most part of the upper gudging and the foott of the stempost, and the shortest peice of twine is from the uppermost part of the uper gudging to the upermost part of the lower gudging that was before , and likewise I have sent the rudder head. I would not have the lowermost pintle nayld on untill it comes to my hands. Thee gudging must be four inches and a halfe wide, near five. Likewise send nayles for the said use and a great hammer, and I doe not question but to hang him as well my selfe as he was before. I have taken two marks of gold and bought eight men, four women, two boys and [a] girle. I desire your Worship to send me some sayes, paper brawls, white pautkeis and course sletias, and the price of the sletias, and an anchor of good rum. If your Worship doth send any come to Accra, I can furnish you here with the old debt. 875. Hugh Hilling Mumford, 28 Oct. 1686 Yours I received by Captain Peter, by whome I received twenty sayes, twenty course sletias, ninty paper brawl es, and thirty gallons of rum. The sayes are much rat eaten, ten of them, we found a dead rott [= rat] in the case. According to order I have sent per Peter two marks, one ounce, seaven angles, of which there is two ounces , three angles of cratra mony by itselfe, and likewise eight men , four women, two boyes and one girle. There is one of the men hath had a great riseing on his thigh since I bought him, I desire your Worship the Docto r may look affter him and I will sattisfie him for it. I am very sorry of the bad infonnations your Worship hath had ofme ,58 buttbe reason of my goeing to Accra was to put of some nicconees and blew perpetua.noes , which the people at Barraco like very well but will not goe to the price. 876. Hugh Hilling Barracoe , 1 Nov. 1686 Yours received by Roger Teage, and likewise the rudder, which be have hanged very well with much trouble , and according to your Worships order at the retume of my cano, which must fill me some water , I shall make the best of my way for Cabo Corso. I have taken one mark of gold and have bought three men and two women , I wishing time were inlarged until] the fight is over, wh.ich will be within this ten dayes. [After presumably visiting Cape Coast , Hilling was back eastward later in the month, as follows.] 877. Hugh Hilling Barracoe Road, 19 Nov. 1686 By reason of small winds and a windward currantt I did not arrive hear untill nine oftbe clock last night. I have a verry good trade , this day I have taken two mark and three ow1ces of gold this day and bought three men and one weomen slaves . I would desire to send mee downe what powder you can conveniently, and likewise sheets and som knives, with there price. I have but ffive barrells of powder left, Jett the powder be in halfe barrells as much as you can. I shall advise your worship aboutt our affaires more in larg by the greatt canoe. 878. Hugh Hilling Barraccoe, 21 Nov. 1686 This accompanyes John Pound in the great canoe, which will certifie you all the powder is gone and most oftbe sheets. I hope my letter by my canoe hath reached your worships hands before this time, which hath certified your worship what is vendable here, that is powder , sheets, knives and paper brawles , which is the goods I wante att present. Here is a prospect of an indeferant good trade att present if your worship thinkes fitt to supply mee. 879. Hugh Hilling Barracoe, 26 Nov. 1686 These are to certify you that I received the 24 instante of Mr James Baily seaventeen whole and six halfe barrells of powder, and six chests of sheets. I have taken seaven marks of gold and bought tenn men and two weomen slaves. Laste night in the tumadoe the thunder and lightning splinterd our maste in the way off the riging and struck down e two of our men, butt all is well againe. 880. Hugh Hilling 30 Nov. 1686 According to order I have sent by Mr Bayly eleaven men, two women slaves; and I have received of Mr Hobbs four whole, eight halfe, and eighteen quarter barrells of powder and one hundred paper brawl es, and likew ise procured a cano for Mr Hobbs. 881. Hugh Hilling Barracoe, 6 Dec. 1686 Yours received dated the 3 d instant by a two hand canoe that came from Accra. 59 I have butt one man and two woemen slaves and nine marke of gold. I shall want some powder and sayes, and if your worship doth send and[= an] order for the gold I desire you would send mee a bulce to putt itt in. 1would have enlarged more butt the cannoe would nott stay. 882. Hugh Hilling Mumford, 26 Jan. 1686/7 I have sent you up a five hand cano with two hired canomen and the sloops two canomen and cano, which desire your Worship to dispatch down to me againe. For the other two canomen I bargaind w ith them for one angle per man and at the delivering of the cano your Worship to pay them. Likewise have 25 chests of corn on board for Mr Whiteing. I can advise your Worship nothing concerning Barracoe, for I am weighing anchor now to goe their. 883. Hugh Hilling Barracoe, 3 March I 686/7 Yours received by the 17 hand cano, and this you will receive by Mr Whiteings cano. Trading has been very dead, and the Anguina people is beaten,60 but they intend to fight againe and powder will vend here. I have but three men two women slaves and one mark and six ounces of gold. I shall inlarge more by the great cano. 884. Hugh Hilling Barracoe, 6 March l 686/7 This you will receive by William Fisher , in the 17 band cano in her return from Accra, and [is] to acquaint your Worship that the Anguina[s] bath beaten the Accrons, and most of their great men killed, but they intend to fight againe and doe buy some powder; our musquetts they doe not like as well as the Dutch musquetts. If they doe continue buying of powder our cano shall come up very speedyly. As for com there is none to be gott here, but if noe trade presents if your Worsh.ip thinks convenient, there is com plenty at Mumford for to supply Mr Whiteing with, but in the intrim I desire your Worships further orders. I have four men and two women slaves, and two marks and a halfe of gold, which I did not think convenient to send by the great cano without your Worships order. Brian lngall desires your Worship to order him up to Cabo Corso by reason he has been very sick oflate and continues weak, for here the people are in continua LI fear . 885. Hugh Hilling Mumford , 20 March (16]86/7 Yours I received by Mr James Baly, and am verry sorry I have displeased your Worship in not sending up the slaves and gold by the great cano. The occasion was because their was no order for itt in the letter that I received by the cano for itt. I desire your Worships pardon for thjs misdeamenor, and I shall be more dilligent by such opertunities hereaffter. All the people hath deserted Barracoe , being afraid of Ahenesah, 61 and some of them are gon to Accra and some of them are here at Mumford , about makeing a pall aver with the Accrong Cab ushers to settle at Wineabee. 62 Their pall avers will be a Tewsday. Here is slaves plenty here but I want some good sayes, these I have are worm eaten, therefore I desire your Worship to send a cano for these slaves I have and to send me down a cases [sic] of sayes and some whole and halfe cases of spirrits and the prizes oftbem. I have seaventeen men and two woemen slaves and two marks, four ounces of gold. MrBayly would have bought some corn here but they ask him three angles per chest, but he wayed and went to Accra. They proffered com to me for one angle six taccoes per chest but they would have broad tapseiles , but I proferred one angle six taccoes if they would take it in sayes. Pray send down some irons and mallegetta and some spare revitts [= rivets]. 886. Hugh Hilling Mumford, 22 March 1686/7 Yours dated the 21st I have received by the eleaven hand cano, with twenty cases of spirritts, and ten anchors of rum and ten pair of irons. I was proffered 4 angles a case for the spirritts but I will hold them a day or two more higher to se if I can get more, but if not I will sell them for four. I have sent by William Stephens two markes and five ounces of gold, and eighteen men and one woman. I have agreed with the Cabosbeirs for com at one angle six taccoes per chest and they will bring it to the watterside as fast as they can. 887. Hugh Hilling Mumford, 5 April 1687 This you will receive by Mr Pepperell with eighteen chests of com, with five ounces seaven angles and eight taccoes of gold and three men slaves. Bryan Ingle is dead. He dyed the first of this instant in a cano coming up for Cabo Corso, the canomen brought him aboard the sloope againe, and we buried him in the sea. One of our canomen is panyard for lying with a Cabushers wife in Fanteen. If nothing of consequence happen within six or seaven dayes 1 will make the best of my way up to Cabo Corso. 888. Hugh Hillinge Winnabay, 21 April 1687 Not finding come coming in at Mumford, but was putt of from day to day, and 1 understanding by some of the Blackes that the Anguina people came downe here to Winnabay, I wayed and came downe here. I was here three dayes before I had any trade, but since Sunday last I have taken one marke seaven ounces of gold and bought three slaves. I desire your worship to send downe some sayes, sheets, broad and narrow tapseiles, paper brawl es, course sletias, knives, ankors of rum, cases of spirits with all the expedition you possible can, for I loste the taking of four ounces of gold today for want of sheets and knives. My canoemen hath broake my canoe and are both run away. I could hardly gett a canoe to come up. Pray send keyes for the cases of spiritts. 889. Hugh Hilling Mumforde, 27 April 1687 Yours of the 25th instant I have received by the eleaven hand canoe with forty broad tapseeles , fourty course sletias , one hundred paper brawles , fifty narrow tapseeles , twenty cases of spirritts , sixty herba longees in thirty double peices , and tenn ankors of rum , which I might had taken money for, but there was a pallavar aboute a man that was killed in the way geeing to Anguina which caused all the people to deserte the place ,63 but on Friday they intend to goe there againe. I have sent by Henry Stephens, two markes one ounce five angles of gold , one man two weomen slaves , and tenn chests of corne, and two chests ofB1yan Ingalls and two pillowes and one carpitte . For money I saw none he had, for he is indebted to mee for one ar1kor of rum, four angles in gold, and five angles for parte of provitions I brought from Caboe Corsoe down whith mee. [At some point after this letter, the Ann evidently returned to Cape Coast Castle , before undertaking a further voyage east.] 890. Richard Bradshaw & Hugh Hilling Mumford , 24 Aug. 1687 This is only to advise of our arrivall at this place, which was at five yesterday in the evening , and this morning Mr Hugh Hilling went ashore in our canoe . Wee are in hope of having a trade with them, as Mr Hugh Hilling gives me an account, but the sea at present runs very high [so] that very few canoes comes off, and by bad fortune that evening our own was oversett , and halfe her side staved out, and is at present a hore with the canoe men. Mr Hugh Hilling tells me it was only their fault, but wee are in hopes of mending her againe . This goes by the great canoe which came from Mr Bayly. Wee furnished them with a cask of water, and would have boyled some corn for the slaves , but the canoe men being in hast would not stay. They make here a great inquiry for says, sheets , and rumme, which wee are very ill stored with, but will do our indeavours to the utmost of our powers. 891. Richard Bradshaw & Hugh Hilling Barracoe, 14 Sept. 1687 This is only at present to give an accompt of our proceedings since wee departed from Cabo Corso. The first place wee touched att was Mumford , where wee continued about seaven or eight days, but there was so little to be don that wee thought it not worth the wbile staying any longer, for in the first place their mony is very bad, and most of it era era, and those goods they had occasion for wee could not supply them with, by reason they are so extrearne broken that they would not looke on them , and most places wee have been at since, all their inquire is for says , perpetuanoes , nicconees, sheets , and longees . Indeed wee have a great many of them on board, but the worme have damnified most of them, but some wee made a shift to putt off, and if the rest had been good wee should have disposed of the major part of them. The people that lived formerly at Barracoe are building a new towne, which is called Shree, its about three leagues to the eastward ofBarracoe , 64 and they are at present so unsetled that there is very little to be don with them, so [we] are plying to windward as fast as wee can, designe once more to touch at Mumford, and there shall lye till further orders from you, which wee hope will be by the returne of this canoe. [The Ann Sloop, now commanded by Richard Bradshaw alone, was subsequently employed in a voyage to Accra, and back thence to Cape Coast, in Nov. 1687 (nos 783-4); to Komenda in early Dec. (no.304); again to Komenda and Sekondi later in the same month (nos 118, 307-8); and to Accra in Feb. 1688 (no.797) and again in March (no.803). At the end of March 1688, the Ann was again at Komenda , assisting in the evacuation of the effects of the RAC factory there (no.331 ).] The Alligator Sloop, Commander Nicholas Pepperell [PepperelJ was commanding the Alligator Sloop from at least March 1687, making voyages to Komenda and Sekondi to the west in (nos 75, 236--7); to Accra to the east in March ( nos 7 50-1 ), calling at Mumford on the way back to Cape Coast in early Apr.ii (no.883); again to Komenda and Sekondi in April/May (nos 78-9, 247, 249-50) ; to Accra, to deliver com , in May (no.755); to Komenda and Sekondi, June/July (nos 87-8, 258-60); and to Komenda again in Aug. (nos 277-9). The main correspondence from him which survives relates to an expedition to fish for oystershells, off Amisa, in Sept. 1687, as follows.] 892. Nicholas Pepperell no date This morning our canoe broake all in peces agoing of the third tume, wee haveing bad seas and butt fourteen butts of shells on board. I hope you will be pleased to send mee order what wee shall doe. 893. Nicholas Pepperell Amersa , 21 Sept. 1687 Yours of the 19th instant have received, with the seaven hand canoe. This morning wee were like to lose her thee first tume of, shee being to bigg and to beavie for this place, that there is noe possibility in getting shells off in her. I have sent her up, and Jeremiah Mitchell with this letter, who will informe you more at large. 894. Nicholas Pepperell ffrom on board the Alligator Sloop, Agga 25 Sept. 1687 My last was by the 7 hand canoe bearing date the 21st instant, and have Jay ever since at Amersa expecting your pleasure. Not hearing from you and having not any canoe to send to know what I must doe, this day I thought good to weigh and got as h.igh as Agga; from whence I send this, expecting your pleasures, by this bearer. 895. Nicholas Pepperell Amersa, 2 Oct. 1687 This is to give you notice that this day wee have compleated our loadeing with sbeJis. I have on board seaventy butts, and will if God willing make the best of my way for Cabo Corsoe. Thjs comes by Jerimiab Michell , who is very sick, and hath been soe this three or four days. This canoe hath like to raised [ms. 'rasied'J the price of the shells, they telling the people here that this butt we have was bigger then the other, they demanding halfe an angle more per butt, with much adoe l have gott itt at the rate before. [In October, the Alligator was again at Komenda (no.291), and in early November at Accra (nos 781, 863).J 896. Nicholas Pepperell Amersa, 22 Nov. 1687 These are to give you notice that l have on board fifty eight butts of shells, the canoe being not serviceable and shall God willing make all speed possible up to Caho Corso. 897. Nicholas Pepperell Caho Corso Castle, 31 Dec. 1687 Since there is a vacancy of a Comander in the shipp Frances , now bound for England, doe humbly request your Worsrups acceptance of me in that imploy, begging your answeare herein, that I may provide for the voyage. [Whether Pepperell was given command oftbe Francis is unclear. In Feb. to April 1688 the Alligator was on a voyage or voyages to Komenda and Sekondi, but was now commanded by Leonard Jeffreys (nos 138-9 , 141, 323, 33 J, 867).) 