XII FOREIGN COMPANIES The 1686-8 correspondence also differs from that of 1681-3 in including some letters received from representatives of foreign companies trading on the West African coast, the Dutch West Indian Company and the Danish African Company. Obviously , such letters must also have been received earlier, but were not then copied into the Cape Coast letter-books. There is no evident rationale to their inclusion or non-inclusion , which presumably reflects merely different instrnc .tions given at different periods to the Company 's clerks. These letters are all recorded in English, but there is no indication whether they were originally written in that language , or translated from Dutch on receipt at Cape Coast. DUTCH WEST INDIAN COMPANY (ELMINA) Most of the letters reproduced here (20 in all) were received from the Director.General of the Dutch West Indian Company in West Africa , 1 resident at the fort of Sao Jorge da Mina (Elmina),2 who was at this time Nicolaes Sweerts. These letters seem to comprise an occasional rather than a regular correspondence, relating to various matters of interest common to both Companies which arose from time to time (and it lapses for nine months after May 1687). In addition to supplementing the information received from the RAC 's own factors on certain episodes, this correspondence serve usefully to illustrate the unusually friendly relations which existed between the two Companies at this period. 3 976. N Sweerts A Mina , 4 Feb. [16]85 [= 1686]4 I cannot by any means leave giveing you adv ice that their is a Ffrench pyrott up to windward , mounted with 28 or 30 gunns , and! 18 or 20 pattererors. He hath taken a Dutch interloper, and affter that an English Companys vessell; 5 and now about three dayes agoe hath taken our vessell , named Seroosherk, and put all our men one [= on] an English Companys vessell but left noe gunns nor any aminition , and scarce left them soe many sayles as to bring them heither. The Captain of her [i.e the English ship] is made Captain on that vessell which they have taken from us,6 and tbe rest of the men [ of the English ship] , they have left ashoar to windward. 7 Their is two black boyes come here along with her, which belongs to Cabo Corso soe as they say, but I cannot tell you the true relation at present of anything. 977. N Sweerts A Mina, 4 Feb. 1685 [= 1686) Yours per Mr Wight and Mr Hassell I have received , and have informed them of all the ships that were taken by this last pyrate, for as much as I know, and that there is a vessell belonging to the Royall Company taken and de! ivered to our men, which were there aboard of our vessell which they have taken. Ile no more but referr to the report done to the above said gentlemen. 978. N Sweerts A Mina, 5 Feb. 1686 Tllis day our Councill being here, we have generally agreed that the English vessell which hath been plundered , belonging to the Royall Company, should be redrest to your Worship, and dispose of it to yowá Worship[s] one [= own] pleasure, but my design is, if you be minded to part with her, to sell her to me, and lett me know the least price, and shall see to agree with you, if you will not to[o] dear valleye her, and will either give you inexchange on accompt a brave shallop or else pay all in gold , soe as your Worship pleases. Soe noe more but desire your speedy answer. 979. N Sweerts A Mina , 7 Feb. [16)85/6 These are only to desire your patience till to morrow, shall as then send down Mr Smith and entrust him to make an agreement mf possible , and if you are pleased to abate , being I thing [= think] a little to dear at the rate of IO markes of gold, for I doe not judge her to be worth soe much, for she Jacks a great deale before she be ffinished. 980. N Sweerts A Mina, 8 Feb. 1685/6 Yours I have received and se that you are come to an agreement of selling the vessel! for six and a halfe marks of gold, which shall be returned to you per first occasion, for my desire is that you would be pleased to send up a canoe for to fetch the water casque, and the two men which are aboard of her, being I would fitt her as soone as possible. Last night amounst the men which came from Axim, which by the reason of the hard usage of the pyrate where put ashore, there was two English men belonging to the James, which per these I am sending to you. I am advised there is seaven more amoungst the Negroes, but they will not release them, without they have a present ,8 and it lyes not in my power to take them per fforce, being they are at the other side of the river , but if you are pleased to give me order what charges you will be at, shall take care to release them, and Jett them be sent to you. Amoungst the Dutch men here last night, there is one which bad a little mony left, which hath paid the charges of coming heither [which] amounts to 2a. that is for the two Englishmen 5a, which I desire you would have retum'd to the poor ffellow back againe. As for the seamen, I cannot as yet give an account but will inquire whether there is any which are minded to goe into your servis and advise you per next. 981. N Sweerts A Mina, 14 Feb. 1685/6 These are only to desire you to doe me the favour as to advise me wether there is any of your vessels which will shortly be directly bound for England , if soe be there is any I would willingly send some letters along with her for Holland. 982. N Sweerts A Mina, 15 Feb . 1685/6 On Tuesday last I write a letter to our factory at Axim that he should doe his utmost endeavour to redeeme the white men that are their. As soon as they shall be arrived here shall send them down to you. Here which are coming to you 4 seamen are willing to serve the Royall Company, but doe desire you to Jett them goe directly for London, being they have nothing at all left them but on their backs, and then a long voyage will be more tedious for them. If you have 6 iron guns to spaire which will carry 3 pound short, pray Jett me know the price, I shall send some body down to look on them. 983. N Sweerts A Mina , 21 Feb. 1685/6 These are only to accompany 7 of the men that were sett ashore at Ancover. Whether their is any more their I canot tell, but our ffactor at Axim will inquire,and if their are any more their shall be redeemed as soon as possible. A while agoeI did desire you that you would return the commodit ies which were by me taken and send down to you to your Negroes back againe , to wbome they did belong , orelcc sattisfie him, that soe I might prevent all the rogeries which he might invent;which you promised me to doe, but doc here that you have not as yett done, andthat negroe dayly comroing complaining, doe yett once more desire you to sattisfie him, or elce if any mischance might happen shall blame you for it is not my freewill but your desire that they might be returned to you, and you did promis me youwould be bound for all that might happen on that account. 984. N Sweerts A Mina, 23 Feb. 1686 Yours per Richard Pearse with five bendys of gold for the redemtion of your men Ihave received, and will per first occasion send it up to our Factor at Axim. 985. N Sweerts Mina, 23 March 1686 The vesscll which arriv 'd here this day is the Castle DElmina , set sayle out ofTexell the 4/14 January and 13/23 ditto out of the Downs. They were in company with 6 of our Company's vessells bound fortbis Coast, Angola and Ardra, but with a great storm separated from one another. Thers noe news but that all is at peace inEurope, but in France the persecut ion of the Protestans ,9 and our vessell hathtoucht at sevcrall places to windward but saw noe vessell , niether beard of thepyrot. 986. N Sweerts A Mina , 26 March 1686 This day I bad adv ice from Commenda that the French have brought comoditiesashore there and hath left a white man there to look affter them, all are left at the house of John Cabess, 10 but I will doe my utmost endeavour to hinder them insettling themselves there, soe my desire is you will doe the like, being it is as well your interest as mine. So J have this day purpously sent a negroe to the king ofComendo, that he will not by any means give liber ty to the French to establishthemselves their; if now by fare means be will not, my intention is to liten[= lighten] our ffactory and se what I can doe per force. This John Cabess I have along time minded to puni sh him for his rogery but have not yet had any occasion. Now my desire is, whether he hath any revenues of the Engli sh Company and whether he is [in] your servis. If not I will doe my endeavor to take hold of him and then pay him sufficiently for all. 987. N Sweerts A Mina, 30 March 1686 I give you many and harty thanks for your good advice, you may be assured that I will doe my utmost indeavour to hinder the French in settling at any place. Desire you when needs be to doe me the favourable assistance and you may be sure, as soon as I hear they will settle at any place on the Coast, I will wame you betimes. 988. N Sweerts A Mina, 22 April 1686 Yours I have received, and for answer the vessell which is arriv' d here hath not toucht in the Beneen but only in the Cabons [= Gabons ], Cali bar, and Cape Lopas, so that he cant tell anything concerning your vessell. 11 Our vessell which arriv'd here out of Europe hath met with a vessell up to windward Cape Palm; suppos'd it lo be an English Company vessell but can't certainly tell, being he did not speak to them and was afraid to trust them, being he did not certainly know that she was. 989. N Sweerts A Mina , 29 April 1686 These are only to desire your Worship to doe me the ffavour to spare a carpenter for two months, and if you canot for two, pray Jett me have him for one, being I am in great necessity for want of one, and if I can doe you the like servis in any labourers that are here will doe the like. [PS] Pray lett it be as[= a] ship carpenter. 990. N Sweerts Amina, 24 July 1686 I desire your Worship to doe me the favour if possible of letting me have a warp anchor 12 about200 or 250 lb weight, being I am in nessessity of them. If you canot spare one, pray lett me have as many Scotch coal es 13 as you can spare. If any thing that is here l can serve you, pray freely comand him here. 991. N Sweerts A Mina, 2 I Sept. 1686 Yours per Mr Boylston I have received conceming panyarring John Cabess. 14 I have done not on the account he is in servis of the Royall Company as you now rite, but can show you to the contrary that he is not in your Company 's servis, with your own hand in a letter of the 20th of March [16]86. 15 Yet nevertheless his roggerys done to our Company deserves to be severly punish'd. For the freindship and good correspondence betwixt us, will not be soe hard as otherwise I wou ld have been, yet will not leave such villians unpunish ¥ d. As for oystershells I am not at present furnished, but as soon as have any will Jett you know and let you have as many, or anything elce whe rewith I can serve you, as you please. 992. Nicholas Sweerts Amina , 5/15 Jan. 1686/7 When I gave myselfe last the honour at Cabo Corso to sallute you, your Honour was pleased to acquaint me that you wanted shells, for burning to make lyme. Therefore I have sent your Honour a boat loading, with a ffurther offering of my servis. We are here unprovided of sea Scotch cole for smiths work, if your Honour can furnish me with a small quantity shall be very thankfull for it. 993. Nicholas Sweerts att the Mine, 9 May 1687 stilo novo Some dayes agoe after inquiry I was certainly informed that a certain negro, called Obo, living near Fort Fredericks Burgh, by that people or slaves hath taken prisoners two off the West Indies Companies slaves who were cannoe men, as they were coming hither from the Mouree , and that they brought the foresaid cannoe.men aboard off Captain Hendricks ship, for which he bestowed on them on[e] anker off brandy and two musketts for the canoemen , not being in the least indebted to him. 16 The state off the affair being thus, worshipfull Sir, I desir friendly off your worship that you will be pleased to deliver me up the foresaid negro Obo, that I may doe the West Indies Company reason , or otherwayes I in treat that you will be pleased to take him in custody till he release the two cannoe men or pay four ounces off gold for them. Your worships servant Griffin knows the bussines very weel and I know will deal faithfully in the matter. 994. Daniel Hendrix From aboard the ship Christianus Quintus, 17 9 May 1687 stilo novo Just now afternoon I receaved your worships letter wherein it appears that your worship has receaved a letter from the General off the Mine, who complains that the negroes under your government should have seas'd upon a cannoe with two negroes which belong to the Mine, and further that they should brought them aboard off my ship. To which I answer that I ame altogether ignorant ofitt, butt the same was <loon by my boat, which went away in the middle of the night wee! arm'd to board my pinnace and bring her aboard my ship, so that I doe not know that any under yow.worships command were in the least concerned, and being my pinnace was off great importance to me I doubt not but that I should have repaired the loss one way or another, but now am resolved to take my payment off the slaves. Yesterday my drummer run away to Com1antin, being indebted two hundred gilders att home and aboard ship, occasioned by that the General off the Mine was pleased to invite him to the Companyes service, as your worship will see by the inclosed coppie off the letter writen by the Generali of the Mine to the foresaid dnimmer. Today I have written a letter to Mr Jo'el[?] Smith at Cormantin, 18 who sayes that tomorrow I shall have ane answer, according to which I intend to take my measures. I remain infinitly thankfull to your worship for all kyndnesses, hoping to find a tyme wherein I can recompente them . In the mean tyme I wish your worship all desired happiness 995. Nicholas Sweerts Castle Del Mina, 17 /27 May 1687 The 13/23 came here two Negroes from Succondee who said they had a letter from your worships ffactor directed to your worship, which according to their report did beare, that a ship with our colours bad taken four Negroes belonging to Captain De Bastion and then afterwards sayled away. 19 The 14/24 I hope to have had some further news from your worship, or from our Comess 20 att Succondee, butt the 15/25 I received advice from Axim that the 10/20 an English Companys ship named the St John under the comand of Captain John Rocet, was come into Axim road, which Rocet said that bee was taken by a Ffrencb pyrate of 24 gunns and 100 men about the red cliffes, 21 who tooke away all his goods, gunns, necessarys, as also broake up the ship in severa11 pleaces, soe that according to what Mynh eer Verdyke 22 writes, shee [is] very neer unfitt for goeing to sea. 23 The canomen that brought mee the aforesaid letter say that they know nothing of any English shipp neer Axim butt of a little pyrate, who had taken two of their comrad s (that went aboard in a canoe) and carried them away with them. The same day wee received advice from our Comess at Succondee , whoe confirmes the same that the two Succondee canomen reported upon the 13/23. In all this doubt tis my oppinion that the same little ship which Mynheer Verdyke said was English Companys ship, is the same little pyrate which took away the negroes from Succondee and Axim , soe much the more, because upon the 25th instant shee went from Succondee, and past by Commenda and this place, almost out of sight in the sea, and likewise yesterday in the evening our people of. Cormanteen se a ship passing by at sea, which by appearance is the same shipp. If in case your worship hath any shipp which is called the St John, whereof the Captains name is John Rocet, then will my supposition be false, and that which is written by our Comess Mynheer Verdyke true, which I humbly desire your worship will be pleased to lett mee know, for my further information. I knew no better but that your worship was informed of every thing thus farr , especially because your worships ship departed yesterday night for Comenda. 996. Nicholas Swerts Castle Del Mina, 16/26 March 1687/ 8 Wee cannot beleive that the unknown French ship is a pyrate, 24 because on Tuesday and Wednesday last he was at Comenda , and likew ise hard by our fly boat, but did not hurt , and which is more wee have advise from Axim that there passed by a French Companyes shipp, (appointed to Whiddah, for slaves) called the Glorious , Captain Barritt , mounted with twenty gunns and forty five men. Wee do beleeive and maintain that this is the same shipp, but that the said Captain Barritt did want sugar &ca. Wee could not neglect to send your Worshipps the inclosed, wherein wee have ordered the Chiete Merchant Everaurs 25 to do all things requisite forprotecting the Royall Company ofEnglan<ls ships, in case she comes within reach of the gunns at Cormantyn, notwithstanding without that the aforesaid Chief Merchant would have knowne his duty. In case your Worsh ips know any further news, it will be very acceptable to Jet me hear of it, as also the continuation of your Worships good and acceptable correspondence. I recom .mend you to God. DANISH AFRICAN COMPANY (CHRISTIANSBORG, ACCRA) These two letters received from the Danish African Company arose out of the pawning ofFort Frederixborg and ofChristiansborg by their governors to the RAC in 1684-5 , whose legality was repudiated by the Danish Company. Agreement was eventually reached in 1688, whereby the English renounced their claim to Christiansborg but kept Frederixborg. 26 It may be noted that at least two other letters were received in this period from the Danish Director-Genera l, perhaps on the same subject, which are alluded to in the Rawlinson conespond ence, but were not copied into the Cape Coast letter-books. 27 997. Nicholas Ffencman Christiansburgh, 13/23 Aug. 1687 Heretofore never haveing the good fortune nor occasion to honor my self by writing to you, I wish you health happiness , and prosperity , and that it please Almighty God to preserve you many years. Seeing by our Royall Commissionate Danish West India Affrican Company I am now ordred to be second person and likewise Councellor next to the Generali Hans Luke, as alsoe Captain Thomas Towers by the aforesaid high and much esteemed Company is made of the Councell with us, who has orders to take perticular notice in every thing, and utterly to disowne and slight all former disorders and misunderstanding, to the end aU things may be brought in good order, I doubt not but by the first the Ffort Ffredrickburgh will come under bis Royall Majestie of Denmarks protection, and wee have it in our possession, whereupon I desired Captain Thomas Towers, when sailed from hence, that he would enquire of you concerning what is past, because our Royall Company and I am in the darke about it, chiefly of the Ffort Christianburgh, in order our present place of residence , there being money layde out upon it by those who proceeded you, which neither the Royall Company of Denmarke nor I have seen any instructions for, but only hearde discourse about it, and on the contrary Generali Hans Luke, which I askt him, who would not acknowledge noe such thing to me. Now haveing lately received some letters from Captain Thomas Towers, by which I am infonned that those who proceeded you had deposited seaven mark.es of gold a[tt] the request of the Generali Hans Luke upon that Ffort Christiansburg, in orderd the Generali Hans Luke did impart the buisiness and shewed me the obligation, by which it appeares that nott only the ffortt Christians burgh but all the ammunition in it, and which is more twenty good men and twenty good weomen slaves belonging to our Royall Company or [sic: = are?) impignorate ,28 for six marks, one ounce , nine angles and six taccoees in gold, and that upon such slite conditions , which maks me much admire that he should put in pledge to other nations such ffortresses and slaves belonging to the Royall Majestie ofDenmarke, and should know noe better how to maintain kings ffortresses intrusted to him, which if his Majestie was informed of, would be highly displeased, wherefore I wish from my heart upon the Generalls accompt that soe soone as possib le his buisiness concerning the ffort Christiansburgh may be accomodated, that noe further differences may happen betwixt the Royall Affrican Company of Denmark and the Generali Hans Luke , which as I have understood by Captain Thomas Towers letters, you are verry well inclined that the buisiness should be accomo.dated, and that you had delayed for my comeing, which I likewise wish heartily to have the honor to kiss your bands. Seeing my health and buisiness will not allowe it, I intreat you would be pleased to excuse me, and seeing wee expect letters dayly from home, and waite Captain Towers dayly to come here before he goes home, wee will advise togather what is best to be donn, doubting not a friendly accomodation. 998. Nicholas Fencman Christiansburgh , 8 Oct. 1687 I doubt not but that you have received my letter dated the 23dAugust by address of Mr Mark Bedford Whiting, your chiefffactor at Accraa, but had noe answer. Now I under stand by Captain Thomas Towers that latly he hath spoken to you about your pretended right to Christiansburgh for some marks of gold, which your predecessors , at the desire of of the deceased Hans Luke, had layd out on the aforesaid ffortt, which our Royall Company never gave him order to put in pledge their fforts belonging to the Crowne of Denmarke to other nations, far less to deliver the ffort Ffredrickburgh in possession of your predicessors because it was put in pledge , but on the contrary to defend the same to the utmost, and obseive the said Royall Companys intrest in all things. Our Royall Company did not know in the least Christians burgh was impledged , but of the ffort Ffredrickbu rg, whereof, I hope, our Royall Company will have possession soe soone as possible, which for three years by your predecessor , you and the aforesaid Hans Luke hath been keept ve1y close, and though I have served our Royall Company sixteen or seaventeen months in this method neither your predecessor nor you did acquaint me with it, nor did the Heer Hans Luke give any answer to the Royall Company for his past fault, out of what absolutely pressing neecessity or perswasion he had don such a thing, but to his advantage, death prevented any further.29 I understand likew~se by Captain Thomas Towers that you desire to have the money layd out by your preede[ ce ]ssor , at the desire of the Hans Luke (he being dead), to be paidd with intrest, allthough I find noe intrest specified in the contract, but according to my commission from our Royall Company to succeed Hans Luke in command , I am ordred to maintaine their Royall ffortresses to the uttermost and to observe their intrest soe far as I can, wherefore I order Captain Thomas Towers , as alsoe chief mate Tyaerd Tyerkers, soe soone as they are at Cabo Corso, to speak once more to you about the money layd out by your prede[ce]ssors on the ffort Christiansburgh, chiefly that you will be pleased to dispense with the payment of the money upon the ffort Christiansburgh till such time as our Royall Company be informed of it, and give me order how to act in the affaire, soe long as it's in our possession , but in case you doc not approve of my request, and that I must be put out by you, and you desire me to pay the money layd out by force, as the Generali Henry Nurse upon the 16th day of July, being come to anchor in Accraa Roade, made mee pay perforce five ounces of gold before he would lett me goe out of Captain Goulds shipp, 30 upon the accompt of Hans Luke, which he had noe reason to have ofme but but of the aforesaid Hans Luke, with or without intrest, soe J say I neither can nor will pay the money, but desire some instructions to bear me harmles, and likwise to know the aforesaid sum of money, a month before, upon the which accompt I doe give Captain Thomas Thowers and Tyaerd Tyerkens his chief mate to treat with you about the ffortt Christiansburgh in or soe belonging to his Royall Majestie of Demnarke, and what shall be don by them shall be approved of and acknowledged, and on their assignation to pay the sum agreed on, soe that you by authority order, and full power, duely deliver up all acts, obligat ions and instructions may be disanuled and made of noe effect, likewise the restitution of20 good men and 20 good weomen slaves, belonging to our Royall Company of Denmarke, which your prede[ ce ]ssors had as a pledge in keeping at the ffort Ffredrickburgh. 