I JAMES ISLAND (GAMBIA) The English fort on James Island in the River Gambia had been established in J661, by the Company of Royal Adventurers Trading into Africa, the predecessor of the RAC, and inherited by the RAC in the 1670s. The trade from James Island was conducted not only up the River Gambia itself but also over a wide section of the coast to both north and south, and was for ivory, wax, gum, hides and dye.wood, as well as slaves. 1 It is clear that James Island normally reported directly to the RAC in London, rather than through Cape Coast Castle , so that correspondence from the Gambia was not regularly registered in the Cape Coast letter-books which make up the Rawlinson corpus. This arrangement reflected patterns of ship movements: the trade to the Gambia (and also to Sierra Leone, to the east) being conducted mainly by ships sailing directly from and back to England (or, if they carried slaves, to the Americas), without proceeding further east along the coast;2 while conversely, ships bound for the Gold Coast did not normally call at the Gambia en route, blllt took a course from the Cape Verde Islands south and east through the open sea before turning north to make their first landfall on the West African coast further east, in the area of Cape Mount (in modem Liberia). 3 Exceptionally, however, the Rawlinson corpus contains three letters from the factory at James Island -plus one further letter (no .919) from a ship calling there -during 1686-7. Of the three letters from the factory, one (no. I) relat es to a transfer of goods from James Island to Cape Coast and one (no.3) to goods taken on board an RAC ship, which were .charged to Cape Coast, while the third (no.2) is a letter of congratulation on tile appointment of the Committee of Chief Merchants at Cape Coast; and it is evidently these particular transactions which explain this exceptional correspon.dence. The first of the James Island letters mentions , implicitly as an innovation, that two of the RAC ships annually of those headed for the Gold Coast were henceforth to call there, to land goods at the factory. This does not, however , seem to have produced a more regular correspondence; apart from the ships by whichthese three letters were transmitted , at least one other called at the Gambia on itsway to the Gold Coast during 1686-8, but does not seem to have carried anyletter. 4 1. Alexander Cleave James Island, IO March 1686 This accompanys the Lindsey, Captain James Butler Comander, who was orderedto touch here per the Royall Company for to put me some iron and other goods onshore , which the ship[s] the Company consigns heither for the carriing away theproduce of this place are not capable to bring, per whome have likewise receivedan order for to imbarque on board all such goods as I have per me that is not properfor the trade of this place and to consign them to you , which accordingly I havedone. They importe to as per invoyce and bills of loading inclos'd 429 barrs, beingrated according as I sell them here,5 but if they will yeild more on the Coast 6 bepleased accordingly to give credditt. They are many of them intire as they cameout of England, therefore noe wayes doubt but they will prove well condition'd. Iam in expectation of Captain Pickards arrivall dayly, who is designed for the Coastbut order'd to touch here to put me more iron ashore, 7 per whome shall consignyou some Islands cloth.s, if they come timely to hand, I haveing sent a ship to theIsle of May for the purchaseing the same. 8 1am promised per the Company to havetwo Coast ships touch here annually for better supply of this factory, the tradebeing oflate soe much improv'd that the ships which carry away the produce of theplace are not capable of bringing sufficient for the purchasing. of what they carryaway. If you are pleas'd to lett me know wherein I can be servisable to you per wayof shipping that shall touch here or otherwise you shall finde how ready I shall beto demonstrate myself how much I am [Your assured ffreinde and servant]. 2. Alexander Cleeve James Island, 27 July 1687 Having this oppertunity per the Francis, Captain Mitchell, I could do no less, than to congratulate your confinnation per the Royall Affrican Company, wishing you all health and prosperity in your present employ. 9 I should have sent you some head of catle per this conveyance could that captain have taken them in. Shall readily serve you, when I receive your comands. 3. Alexander Cleeve James Island, 12 Aug . 1687 I wrote you of the 27th July per the Francis, Captain Mitchell, to which I referr you. This accompanies the Coast Friggat, Captain John [sic: = Henry] Wood, who arrived here the 30th July,10 being in want ofprovitions, wood, water & ca., which J have supplyed him with as per the inclosed receipt, for which I make your Factory debtor. 