II SEKONDI The weste rnmost factory held by the RAC on the Gold Coast during the 1680s was that at Sekondi ('Succondee' in these documents). This factory had been re.establishe d, afte r a period of abandonment , in 1683, 1 and was maintained continuously throughout the period of this correspo ndence, from January 1686 to April 1688. In 1686, as is noted in this correspon dence, the factory was in the process of being rebujft or extended in stone, and was henceforth regarded as a 'fort'. 2 The Sekondi factory was primari ly important for trade in gold, though it also supplie d some slaves. It also served the function, as this correspondence illustrates, of giving notice to Cape Coast Castle of the approach of shipping from the west. The Dutch West lndian Company (WJC) also maintained a factory at Sekondi throughout this period, which is frequently referred to in this correspondence. A second Dutch factory which had existed earlier at Takoradi ('Taggeradoe' etc.), west ofSekon di, had been abandoned in 1684.3 In this absence of the Dutch, the Brandenburg African Company had taken the opportunity to establish a factory in Takoradi in 1685,4 but, as reported in this correspondence (no.104), the Bran.denburgers were forced out by the Dutch in Septembe r 1687. 1nJanuary 1687 the French Guinea Company also attempted to establish a facto1y in Takoradi, but this was attacked and destroyed by military forces from Mina, at the instigation of the Dutch (nos 65-8). Sckondi and Takoradi both belonged to the state of Ahanta (' Antia', 'An tea'), which was seeming ly a loose federation rather than a centralized kingdom. 5 Ahanta had been conquered by the interior state of Adorn ('Adoom' , 'Idoom ') in J681.6 In 1683, at the time of the re-establishment of the RAC factory in Sekondi, it was clearly under the effective control of Adorn, with whose ruler 'Tickadoe' the English company negotiated. In 1686, Adom was still ruled by the same man (called 'Teco dce' or 'Tico dee' in nos 42, 44), and was still a power to be reckoned with; but its authority over Sekondi seems to have become tenuous, with instances of harassment of Adorn merchants seeking to trade there, and recurrent rumours that Adorn was contemplating a further attack on Ahanta (nos 16 etc.). The situation was complicated by tensions between Adorn and its own immediate neighbour in the interior, Wasa ('Wassaw' etc.), which culmin ated in a war between the two states in l 688 (nos 29 etc.). The tension s between Adorn and Ahanta on the one hand, and Adorn and Wasa on the other, combined to disrupt trade through Sekondi throughout this period. 4. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 16 Jan. 1685 [= 1686] Your Worships I received, with the knives, rangoes, and corrall, which r will dispose ofto the best advantage I can. As for the warehouse, I shall be ascareful] as posible may be. As for what ships are to windward, I am informed by Captain John Woodfinc there is a French man , and a Dutch interloper , and three other which he could not give an account of. I have heard no news of the Mary as yett; as soon as I can heare of her, I shall deliver your Worships letter and infom1c your Worship thereof. As for my December account I would have sent with my November, but was continuously troubled with [ms 'wt'] the canoe men and the blacks though their business was of noe account , [so] that I could not have time to write them all out; I haveing one write, could not perswade Mr Innes to tarry till I write the other out. I would have sent them now, but durst not trust the ca noe men with the mony.7 Of the occasion ofmy writing at the present, is to informe your Worship of the death of Robert Chapple, who died the I5th instant. Mr Baily 8 presents his servis to your Worship, and desires a corker[ = caulker], if there be any to be spared; a Munday he hopes to heave up her keel, and desires to informe your Worship he is in good health and hath been soe ever since he hath been here. John Veasey is very ill, and am affraid we shall loose him; soe is Mr Hilling but I hope he will recover. The othere sleepes night and day, ask bim how he doth he saith very well, butt I beleive he is ill and is not sensible of it. Captain Assumes 9 wants his Chrismas cloth. 5. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 18 Jan . 1686 I received your letter by Bastian Ferdinand, whome I sent aboard Mr Baily, whowisheth he had a corker in his stead , but he will make the best shift he can. MrHelling is indeferently in health againe; but JohnVeasey is little better, lying andsleeping continually. Here is two Fflemish interlopers in the road; but I cannot here[= hear] any news of the Mary yett, neither by blacks nor them. Shortly we shallwant blew( = blue] perpetuanoes, tallow, narrow nicconces. Pray send me waits[= weights] and scales, to weight the beads, for we have sorts the Dutch 10 hath not,which I lrnow not how to sell; also the weight of the whole chest, otherwise ifpa1tbe sold know not how to charge it in my accompt ; also bow many chests of comewas in those caske[s] sent me last and what the quarter caskc of oyle contains, withthe price ofbotb. l have sent my December accompt by the canoe , but the mony Idurst not trust. 3 marks was paid Mr Humfryes at Christmas; the remaynes I willsend per first conveyance. The Capusheres 11 oftbe twon [= town] are desireous ofCophee 12 and would not be sattisfied till I write , proffering to send a canoethemselves , with the letter. 6. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 22 Jan. 1685/6 I have by this canoe sent downe Robert Stone, who is uncapeable of doeing MrBayley anye servis by reason of sickness. Mr Bailey presents his servis to yourWorship , and will make what expedition he can in crccning [= careening] hisvessel!, one side being done , by reason of the sea being so great could not finish theother. Pray send me as soon as possible may be some blew perpetuanoe s, narrownicconees , and tallow, which would goe off dayly , though l have but small trade , it being rowsawing 13 time yet. We have had a very sickly time amongst us: whenone is up another is down, Mr Chambers haveing had a violent fittofvomitting andloossness but is sometimes cheary at present, Mr Hilling [and] John Veasey beingsometimes well other time s ill. As for my selfe I make shift to keep indiferent well.21st instant a French man of war of 28 gunns anchored here ; the Lieutenant,marcbant and purser came a shoar, who say the ship was given the FrenchCompany by the king of France , to clear the coast of pyrates, who he was informedwore the French flagg. 14 The Captain[s] name is Monseur Lefebrce, who knowesyour Worship very well, as they say; the Captain presents his servis to yourWorshjp, and designs to be at Cabo Corso very spedily. They have a letter from Mr Platt to your Worship , who lyes at Cape Appelonia; 15but Tcannot hear of the Mary, nor none but another French ship of24 gunns to windward, 16 only[= except) 3Fflemish interlopers in this roade. I have also sent a broken mauie 17which would desire your Worship to order another as big againe to be sent in the rome of it. I have nimed out the Cape Coast canoe men; for they would give me ill language and would not work, [so] that the slaves bas played for want of stones; 18soe have gott 9 Succondee men , for 4a 193 men per turne, willing men who will help the slaves fetch the stones,which the other would not. Now the others would work, but I will not lett them; ifl should tum them[= the Sekondi men] out, and they[ = the Cape Coast men] fall to their old tricks I should gett none; now they are contented to work when the others are done. If your Worship would have them down pray send by the next. The slaves work stoutly, and use stone very fast, for the which I am glad I have 4 [sic] Succondee men to supply them. 7. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 28 Jan. 1685/6 This accompanys Joseph Collenwood , who came in a canoe from Cape Tree.spintas,20 from the Generali of the Branburgers, 21 haveing laine their a week before he could gett any canoe, which cost 4a which I have paid. He infonnes me that Mr Platt is carried away by the pyrate and 4 men panyard 22 by the Negroes, the rest he left at Axim. 23 He said he heard aboard the pyrate that the Mary fought him at Cestos,24 but she shot his mayo mast, which occasioned him to leave her.25For further news rrefer to Joseph Colle nwood , who can better infonne your Worship. Pray send some nicconees, tallow, sheets, boysadoes, and blew perpetuanoes. By next opertunity will send my January account. I have bought a man slave for 7 peas which you will receive per the canoe. Our fforte goes very well forward and will goe ffaster when the sloops 26 are gon. We want another maul. We are in a sickly condition amoungst us, Mr Hilling baveing the yallow jaoders [= jaundice]; as for myselfe very well in health. The Capusheers makes a palaver27 for Cophe, so doththe ldoom people, who all know him as I beleive. The Capusheers desire him upontheir account, for they came to me for a letter to your Worship, and they wouldsend a canoe themselves for him . Pray send Captain Assumes cloath. 8. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 30 Jan. 1686 Your Worships is received with the nicconees and tallow, whereof9 nicconces isdamaged. As for the forte we will forward as fast as possible may be. I incouragethe slaves what I can to gett it up before the rains, which they p[r]omise to effect,theyhaveing used their indeavour very well heitherto , but we shall want bricks andlime very quickly, also three trouclls and 100 large staples for the canoe, andnaylcs for the carpen ters, 100single [ms. 'signle'] tenns and as many double tenns.As for goods I want sheets , boysadoes and blew perpetua noes, broad tapseiles.Perpctuanoe s I could put of one blew one grecn,28 which I could not doe before, the Dutch haveing none nor none to supply him at the Mine.291 have almost a chest of sheets left, which arc most damnified, and the rest is soe course[ = coarse] theywill scarce pass but for damaged sheets , all of them almost comeing in one of thelast chests sent me; some may pass when I have better to mix with them, but as theyare they will not take one. As for news to windward I hear none but what yourWorship already knows of, only Mounse r Leffebree who lies at Commcnda, 30 whom I write to your Worships of, he is suspected to be confeding with the pyrate,to sell his goods [which) he takes from other ships, I being informed he soldEnglish goods at Commenda. I have write to Mr Cross31 what I heard, that hemight make what inquirey he could, and give your Worship information thereoff.Mr Bayley hath clean'd his vessell, and stayes but for the creening one side of theAnn Sloope, before he comes down; he hath sent down the other white carpenter,being very sick [so] that be was afraid ofbur iing him here. Pray send me some rumand paper, also the qantity and price of the come and palm oyle sent me last,otherwise I know not how to charge it. I have sent down the letter for Mr Carter 32 by Captain Pctter.33 The people arc glad of Cophes coming up. Captain Assumemakes a pallaver for his cloth. 9. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 2 Feb. 1686 Your Worships of the 30th of January is received and have inquired what I could after the pyrate, alI the news I can hear of him is buy a Portugues who arrived here last night and infonnes the sames [sic] pyrate bath taken 5 ships upon the coast of Brazell, one being loaded with plate, there being seaven Ffathers aboard whom killed and saved all the rest of the men. He saith he se noe ships to windward but the French mans consorte and his tender. The pyrate is suspected to begon down to Ardra.34 I have sent down Collin Hunter, according to your Worships order . I would have sent my Januarys accounts, but they departing soe suddenly affter my month was up, I could not gett them ready. By the next retume of sloop or canoe I shall not faill to send them. I sent down one markes, four ounces, three angles, and four taccoes of gold by Mr Innes, which with three marks already received by Mr Humfryes is the ballance of my December account. Mr Cham bers desires your Worship to order the windows for the lower rooms to be done as fast as they can. Pray send those necessaryes both for the fforte and ffactory , mentioned in my last letter. 10. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 8 Feb. 1685/6 I have received your Worships letter per the Ann Sloope, also by Mr Bayley . Likewise the goods for the ffactory, and other necessarys for the forte. Mr Chambers presents his servis to your Worship, and will husband the lyme and bricks as well he can. For bricks we shall doe pretty well, but lyme we shall want a good quantity more, though we use it but for the outside. Also thirty scaffold poles, and the best of the old timber for linties for the windows, which is all the timber we shall want, till the uper floor be ready; then we shall want nine girders of26 foot long, which since lyme is scarse will be convenient to lay across the fforte and crampt at each end with iron, which will be a great strength to it, if your Worship please to allow thereof. Pray send the windowes as soon as possible may be, also 200 of six penny nayles. We want blew perpettuanoes and more tapseiles, which would fetch a little mony, though we have but small trade and great charges of .canoe hire. The merchants expects great dashes,35 the Dutch spoiles the trade by giveing a sheet in every bendy,36 which would desire your worship to consider of at leasure. As yett but few merchants comes till rowsawing time be over. I have sent my January account by Mr David Innes, also three marks, six ounces, eight angles, six taccoes , being the ballance of my account. I have sent two men one women slaves in three severall months, which I have noe receipts for, neither doe know who I ought to have it of, which I humbly desire your Worship to informe me of. 11. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 14 Feb. 1685/6 I received your Worships letter by Mr Innes with the bricks, lyme and timber and other necessaryes for the forte. For the windows we were forced to use some of the old ones, else we should have tarryed for them. We should have been forwarder, but the sea hath been soe bad, that wc have had noe stones fetcht this week , which occasioned us to use more of the old stones then we were willing. As for the 9 girders I write for, Mr Chambers saith he thought to use noe jeyce [=joist?] at all if had them , but if your Worship dislikes thereof be leaves it to your Worships discression. Pray order three door cases and the windows for the upper roomes to be got ready, also some rope to tye the scaffold poles. As for goods I want only iron barrs and white beads. Here is an old girder that was put up in the last forte,37 which the carpenter saith is not fitt to be put up in this. The girder is very bad, that is true, but Mr Chamb ers is for haveing it up; for my own part I doe not much approve of it, but if better cannot be conveniently spared it may serve. As for the complaint I made of the carpenter in my last letter, he still contiJmes in his obstinancy, doeing nothing but what he listeth himselfe. 12. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 17 Feb. 1685/6 This accompany Mr Chambers , by whome I have sent a sample of white and yellow beads, which is all the sortes are vendible here , especially the white. The samples would have gone by Mr Innes but he hastened away so fast for fear of a tumado, that he went without them. As for other goods I want only sheets. What is wanting for the forte Mr Chambers will inform your Worship. The carpenter hath been very mild ever since he received a check from your Worship, but before their was no rest in the ffactory for him. 13. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 19 Feb. 1686 I am forced to be at the charge of a canoe, to render your Worship an account of our hinderances in building the fforte, ffirst through bad seas that we could gett noe stone, and now through carelessness of the canoe men, who have staved the canoe all to peices. We have used all the old stone which was good, and question not but to have lay'd the floor all by Tuesday next at ffarthest, which had been done before, could we have been supplyd with stone. I would desire your Worship to render us advice what we shall doe with alI the convenent speed, for haveing noe stone cannot tell at present. Mr Chambers present his servis to your Worship and desires some more lyme and bricks; if there be noe bricks, also desires liberty to come down a Satterday affter the floors lad [= laid] and come up a Sunday night. Yesterday a Pourtugees passed by with a Govemer aboard for the Island Princes. 38 Here is a Dutch interloper in the roade, and one at Dicks Cove39 newly come upon the Coast. 14. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 24Feb. 1686 I have received your Worships letter both by the canoe and sloope, also the neccssaryes for the forte, and iron barrs one hundred for the ffactory. For what shall be wanting for the fforte, Mr Chambers will informe your Worship on Satterday next. I have sent a sample of what beads I want by MrInnes. Also sheets, I desire your Worship to supply me with as soon as may be, for I have none. The canoemen I have order'd to goe down in the sloope, 5 that came with the 7 hand and 4 of the old canoemen , which r have paid here , their being 27 turnes due to them. I would a[ = have] given your Worship a ffull account but the wind blowing ffresh MrInnes feard a tumadoe, soe would not tarry. By MrChambers I shall send ffurther advice. 15. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 4 March J685/6 The ocassion of my writing at present is to give your Worship an account that the French man that hath lay soe long to windward is noe better then a pyrate by all signs that may be,40 for here Jay a Dutch interloper in the road, who seing him comeing about the point, weighed in the night and stood of [ = off) to sea, and the next day after he was gon, came into the road againe. The Ffrench man came to anchor ofTaggeradoe under Flemish coulors, were [=where] he tarried not above four bowers[ = hours]. The blacks went aboard to buy goods but they had nothing to sell, but told them they were a Dutch ship. This day we saw him sayle to Shurna41 wearing French coullers, where he rernayns at present. He is a ship of force, and the blacks say f-ulIof men, soe haveing all these suspicions of a pyrate J thought good to render your Worship advice thereof. 16. Thomas Bucknell [Succondee], 42 6 March 1685/6 Your Worships by Mr Bayley is received with the bricks, lyme and timber for the forte. As for other materialls , we want none at present only boysadoes for the ffacto1y. As for my accounts I will send them down in the Ann sloop, for I had no paper to write them out till I received some per Mr Innes, otherw ise your Worship had received them before. As for trade here is little, nor no better like to be as yet, as I can perceive. I set [sic] Cophe to inquire of the blacks why the ldoomes came not down , but he cannot understant the reason of it. All as I can understand the ldoomes have a pallaver with the people above them,43 which hinders their comeing down, but I am sometimes of the opinion they carry a fayr correspon.dence and make a shew of pease with the Antia people , and wait but for an opertunity to come down upon them as they did before.44 I am inform'd by the blacks that Captain Towers, the Dutch interloper, 45 fought the pyrate to windward 3 dayes till his ship sunk under him, he escap'ding [sic] ashoar in his boat to the Brandyburgs forte46 w[h]ere he dyed, I have no certainty but what the blacks report. 47 I here of no ships to windward only one Fflemish interloper in this road. 17. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , no date I have received per Ann Sloop 4 chests of sheets, one chest of beads and one bale of blanquetts , which I have here mentioned in my letter by reason had no letter from your Worship know not what I ought to receive. I have sent down one ofmy accounts by which your Worship may se how my accounts stand, which is all bussiness would permit me to write out, haveing no paper tell Satturday towards night. As for the beads in my account I would not charge quantity nor the remaynes , not knowing what was in the chest, which desire your Worship to send me word, also of those now sent, with the price of the blanketts, and I shall send your Worship two duplicates of my Ffebruary accounts and desire this to be returned, which am forced to require, paper being soe scarce. I have also sent mk4 6oz 4a 4ta of gold by Mr Innes , being the ballance of my account. Mr Chambers desires your Worship to order the windows , lyme and lintels to be sent. 18. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 9 March I 685/6 This accompanys Mr Hilling, who is in a de[s)pera te condition with the fflux who haveing used all possibl e means here to noe effect, earnest ly desired to goe down to have some remidy for bis dangerous distemper, whom I have sent per the canoe. The rest in the factory remayne in good healt[h). Pray send me some boysadoes and whitebeads,which is the only sort of beads I want, desireing when I sent the sample the white especially, and the chest last sent is all ye llow. Mr Hilling can inform your Worship what sort to send me, I have no sample left. Also the price of the blanquets and the weight of the two chest of beads. Mr Chambe rs desires your Worship to send some more lyme and planck. 19. Thom as Bucknell Succondee, 12 March 1686 These lines are to give your Worship an account that Captain Wood is safe arrived in this road from the Boneen ,48 being all in good health at present but haveing ha d much sickness amongst them. For further advice I refer to Captain Woods one [""own) letter, which your Worship will receive per canoe, wherein your Worship will be ffully inform'd of all news.49 We are quite out of lyme [soJthat the work lyeth still for want thereof. 20. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, no date [17 March l 686) Your Worships per Mr Innes is received with the ten boysado es. For other goods I want only white beads which I have writt for in scverall letters before and have received a chest of all yellow instced thereof. I have sent down another duplicate ofmy Ffebruray account wherein is two blanks, one of the beads and the other of the palm oyle. Not knowing the weigt of the chest of beads or quan tity of the oyle could not know how to charge it, which I desire your Worship to send per the next returne, also the weig[ht) of the last chest of beads and the price of thee blanketts, also this duplicate of my account and I shall fill in the blanks and returne another with it. As for ships I heard of none but your Worship hath had already advice of. Pray send me the jeyce and some more lyme with all the speed that may be. Mr Chambers hath bargained for oyster shells 50 to be brought for IOta a but and hath built a kill51 to bume them in the time the slaves lay idle for want oflime, being of opinion he can make lyme cheape here. He hath ventred as far as halfe an ounce, further he will not till he heres from your Worship , also he beleives they will not fetch wood reasonable . I haveing been very sick of late but am somthing bette r at present. 21. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 22 March 1686 Your Worships per Mr Innes is received with the lyme and timber. As for in my last letter being ofno date was an oversight which I desire your Worsh ip it excuse, of date should have been the 17th instant. But for the white beads I never had any word I could not be supply'd before, otherwise I should not have been soe importunate for them. I have filled up my account; also sent another duplycate, but could not charge the remaynes of the beads, not haveing an account what the first chest weigh'd. I want some more Guine clouts and sheets , which I desire your Worsh ip to send per first opertunity. Mr Chambers desires your Worship to send some brick batts , iron work for the girders, a few peices of broken tiles , and the remainder of the jeyce , also to order the sawyer to cutt the boards ready for the floor, and the smith to make the nayles. Ifit stands with your Worships good liken I would come down with my March account my selfe, for one dayes cont inuance if no other bussiness falls out betwixt this and then . 22. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 31 March 1686 Yours of the 26th instant is received with the sheets and Guine stufs and other necessaryes for the forte. Have return'd the chest of yellow beads, the full weigt I received, and not haveing any trade for them. Here is a great Capushere of the ldoms , come down a Sunday last with about two hundred souldiers , with haveing 53as he saith a pallaver with Yankee 52 at the croom, which he keeps closs to himself, till such time as Yankee cometh down. When I understand what the palaver is I shall render your Wors hip advice thereof. I shall make bold to accept of your Worsh ips grant to come when the Capushere is gon, leave the factory in trust with Collin Hunter for so short a time, I desireing but one dayes time their. l want green Welch playns, and Arda cloths 54 haveing a stripe of blew and one of white which the Mine people sell for 14 per one ounce ,55 and some rum. Mr Chambers desires your Worship to order some Ss56 for the girders, nailes and boards and what brick batts the sloop can carry , to be sent; and some lyme, the makeing of which comes to small effect for want of wood. 23. Collin Hunter Succondee, 4 April 1686 Your Worships letter is received for Mr Bucknell, which shall be deliver'd at his return to Succondee; and also I have received bricks, lyme, Ss and other necesarys for the forte, with 10 green Welch playns, and the blew cloth for the Capushere, but he was gon before Mr Bucknell was come down, but Captain Cophe says be will be here in a shorte time againe. As for necessaryes wanting for the forte , Mr Chambers can give your Worship an account thereof. The news is that Captain Towers is in Succondee roade. I sent aboard to know what ships was to windward and there is none but one English interloper. He sayes he did fight the pyrate, since he came from St Thoma, 57 and killed six of their men, but received noe hurte himselfe nor noe of his men. He desire to know his servis presented to your Worship. 24. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 12 April 1686 I have received your Worships letter per the Ann Sloop with sheets, boysadoes, carpitts, green perpetuanoes, knives, rum &ca mentioned in your Worships letter. The English interloper that lay to windward is arriv'd in this roade, being a sloop something bigger than the Adventure Sloop. He was fitted out of Jamaica but the master is a Barbarian (sic: = Barbadian], his name is Steet. He hath a great cargo aboard of all s011s of goods with a bundall of blew perpetuanoes , by which be takes all the trade from the shoar, the canoes being continually aboard of him, so that I can take nothing, but can receive by him noe intelligence of any of the Company ships nor noe other but one which he suspects to be the pyrate, which gave him chase but could not come up with him. Mr Chambers desires your Worship to order the remainder of the deal boards and as many bricks as the sloop can bring, the wether being so bad that we have bad but little stone fetcht, also the two crows to be mended now sent down by the sloop, and the ffl.ag and flagstafe to be sent. I have return' d the quarter cask the last rum was in. 25. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 17 April 1686 These is to inform your Worship of Captain Thomas W oodfines arrival!, who hath sent his letter per this canoe. 58 He hath six and twenty seamen and tradesmen for the Castle59 and a chyrurgion [= surgeon], which are all goeing down in the George Sloop. There is two more Companyes ships to windward, which I suppose Captain Woodfine has given an account in his letter. I have bad great hindrances of trade by reason of this interloper lying here, also am afraid of more by reason of one black at Yankees croom panyard an ldoom merchant which came down to buy goods and sold him aboard the interloper. The Idooms threatens to make war but what the isue of it will bee know not as yett. Captain Assum hath taken up the matter and saith he will end the pallaver. What further news I here of the matter will give an account per the An Sloop. 26. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 21 April 1686 You r Worships of the 15th instant is received with the bricks and dea l boards for the forte . Mr Wood arrived here the Fryday last but the interlope r went to leward the day before, the blacks told me designed to lye at Commendo , which inform'd Mr Wood ofbut have heard nothing of him since. 60 I have had but a very bad trade this month, their being ships continually in the road soe that I have not taken above a mark of gold , for the blacks will not buy anything at the factory as long as any ship be here. The Dutch hath had noe trade niether, havei ng sold nothing but Portugues tobacco, 61 but I question not but to have a good trade when the ship be past and the merchant[s] come down againe from carriing up their goods they bought aboard, for their bath been abundance of mony laid out this month with the ships, especially with the interloper who sold his goods for nothing in comparison to the prizes[ = prices] of goods, he lying here continually from the time I have the first advise , till the day before Captain Woodfine [sic: = Wood?] came down which was Fryday last. Yanke at the croom came to me this day and desired me to wr ite to your Worship, that if the Dutch interloper be taken or by any means the Idoom merchant co uld be recovered, which info1m'd your Worship in my last letter was panyard and sold to him, he would give two slaves for him. Yanke hath given pawns for but the Idooms are not sattisfied with that but told him if he did not procure the merchant they would come down noe more tell they came to fight with him. Mr Chambers desires your Worship to send some more batts ,62 tiles , 14 pieces small hinges and some thin whole deals for the window shutters, IO peny and 6 peny nailes. I received an order per your last letter to sell sheets butt 28 per bendy which I canot do, the Dutch selling thirty two jus t buy me. 27. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 28 April I 686 Your Worships of the 24th instant is received with the bricks and tiles for the forte, also the flag and flagstaff. We shall want seaven hundred good sound tyles more for covering the forte, with more bricks batts, two thousand of 10 peny and 20 peny nailes six (penny?] singles [and?] quarters. As for trade I have none at present, there haveing been never a trader down since my last writeing, but there is some expected about four dayes hence. As for the order I writt ofto sell sheetts but 28 per bendy, is certainly so in the postscript of your Worships letter of the 8111 instant, which Mr Innes se as well as my selfe, but it might be a mistake in the writer. Cophe desires your Worship to give him .leave to come down with the next returne of the sloop. 28. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 7 May 1686 Your Worships is received, the bratt (= bats] and tiles &c. for the forte. As for other necessa1ys that are wanting , is Dutch nailes , doubles and single tens and six peny nailes, also a peice of eleaven foot long and eight inches square to lay over the flanker, with a qua11er of hundred of whole deales, and six slitt deals and some more batts. I have sent down my April account with one marik one ounce one angle and five taccoes of gold being the ballance thereof per Mrlnnes , I haveing had ooe trade at all their being never a trader come down since my last writ ing, the little mony l have been[ = being ] taken the first 4 or 5 dayes of the month. What the occasion should be of their notcomeing down canot writely (= rightly] understand but I judge it to be some great pall aver in the cuntrey. I asked of Captain Assum the reason of it and he told me he heard by two Ancorsa 63 people that the Idooms are preparing war with Antia, but he is not certain of it, nither doth he give much credditt to it, but I hope in a Iittle time to have a better trade, or give your Worship a more true account of the reason of the contra1y. As for news to windward l hear none. Captain Walker went down from hence to Comenda this day. I want some more sheets. 29. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 15 May 1686 I have received your Worships letter per the sloop with those necessaryes for the forte mention' d therein. I have also mounted one of the gunns , but the other the carriage is all to pieces so could not mount it, but are ready for the rest as soon as your Worship pl[e]ases. As for men I know not how to bestow them at present till the house be a little more settled, then if your Worship thinks fitta few more would be convenient. We shall want more for the forts use, twenty two pieces books and staples to hold the windows open, 500 of larg nail es with some oyster shells , here being much rainc fallen oflate, which hath washed down one of the flankers at theDutch forte which compasseth in his yard and hath cract his house, [so) that Ibelieve it will scarce stand another great raines, but ours hath received noe damagebut remayns very firm and sound, which I think to put the goods into a Mundaynext, and remove myselfe as soon as may be. For news to windward I here none atpresent but only that unwelcome news of a bad trade remayns here still, which [is]occasion'd by a pallaver between the Idooms and Wassaws, report'd by a blackwhich went up the cuntrey on purpose to here the pallaver , who saith that the lastwar the Wassaw had with Dunkeder 64 a great Capushere of the Wassaws fled forsafety to the Idooms and they killed him, for which they have been at differenceever since, and now the Wassaws are prepareing war, as they pretend war with theAnguers 65 but the Idooms suspect it against them, so will not lett them passthrough their cuntrey, 66 which was the reason of our small trade and not the!dooms coming upon Antea as was report'd to Assum. Pray send me some sheetsand Guinea stuffs per this first conveyance. Pray send some 6 peny nailes for thefort windows. 30. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 25 May 1686 These is to give your Worship an account of the excessive rains that hath fallenever since the 18th instant almost continually, it haveing washed the Dutch fortdown to the ground last Wednessday morning, which made us very much afraid ofours, we not haveing wherewithall to secure it, but thanks be to God it remayns insafty, Mr Chambers haveing used what means he could to preserve it. We havealso used all our lime and tiles [so) that we have not materialls to goe forward,wherefore we desire your Worship would be pleased to send some lime and tileseither by sloop or canoe, with all convenient speed, for fear offurther danger , the weather continuing very lowring still. Pray send me some sheets and Guine stuffs,for want of which I have lost takeing 3 or 4 marks of gold. 1humble desire yourWorship wou ld be pleas'd to send for Cophee for he is altogether deceitfull that Ihave noe trust in him, being again[s)t the Company intrest if it stands not with hisown, which if he would be true noe man could doe more for their profitt in thisplace for he bears the whole sway in this town and rules them as be lists, but he isaltogethe r false, therefore I could doe better without him, only I should want aninterpreter for the cuntrey people. I would have sent him down myself once but hemade his pallaver with the Cabusheers that they came to the factory, and told mehe should not goe except I gave them a pawn. Captain Pickard arrived here in this road this night and came ashor with his boat and received an affront from the Negroes, he hath a man with him who was Captain Bells servant formerly , by whose order he panyard 4 ounces of gold from these people for a debt they owed bim,67 for which they stop him now ashore and will not lett him goe of without the roony be paid them back againe, which is a great hjndrance to the Captain, he being his gold taker, with severall affronts against the Company for which I would require sattisfaction by force, when we are settle'd, if your Worship pleases to allow thereof, but I will first give account what the affronts are, which I wish I could doe by word of mouth, it being more sattisfaction than by writeing, but by the next opertunity I shall give a full account which I could not do at present, it being late when the pallaver happen'd and the canomen want to be dispatcbt. 31. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 31 May 1686 This accompanyes Mr Chambers who, understanding by Mr Innes canomen their wasno lime aboard the sloop, could not be sattisfied without comeing down for the same. I have received your Worships letter per the cano with Captain Pickard, which I send down affter him to Commendo. Not long since their came two men about midnight to our factory to rob it as we suppose which is very probable was their intent, for they had noe business their at that time of night, but the carpenter overhearing them make their pallaver stept out with a musquet charged with small shot to se what they were, but as soon as they espi'd him they ran away, upon which he fired after them and shot one of them, by which the next day we knew him to be one of this town, so demanded of him what he want'd at that time of night about the factory. All he could plead was a great Capushere was buried their and he came to dig for gold which was buried with him, but all the blacks said that was a blind excuse, for none of them could remember any Cabusher being buried their, but however this fellow affter he was well out of reveng for bis hurte, panyard two of our women slaves and was a carriing them up to Axim to sell them, he being of that cuntrey although now inhabitent here, but was stopt by the Braffo68 of Tagarado. But in the meantime I went and made a pallaver with Captain Assume for the two slaves; he presently panyard one of his [i.e. the offender's] couzens, and gave me [him as] a pawn till I had the two slaves againe, which when I had was unwilling to deliver the man except I might have the ofender, which I perceive did affront Assum, so being unwilling to disoblidg him deliverd the man upon condition Assum should deliver me the ofender in eighteen dayes time, which is now expired, but perseive I am not like to have him of Assume. For ought[ = aught] I know he may be the person hath stoln all the goods hath been lost, and therefore I think nothing but reason he should make sattisfaction, for they will not put up the least thing from us without amends, wherfore thought good to give your Worship this full account, as also desire advise whether I might take him my selfe or not. Pray send per first conveyance some iron barrs. 32. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 4 June 1686 Your Worships per Mr Innes is received with the sheets and Guine stuffs, also those necessaryes for the fort mentioned therein. I sent down two old casks that came with the come [whic h] was given the slaves; but for lime cask here is none, for they were always returnd with the return or the sloop, except one for measureing oystershclls. I send down Mays account with one mark ten taccoes of gold, being the ballance thereof , per Mr Innes, which if I had had sheets and Guine stuffs I should have sent 8 or 9 marks, but the sloope arrivd not till they were gon up the cuntrey, but I question not but they will be down shortly, for sheets they bought of the Dutch, but Guine stuffs he could not supply them with, but} hope ere this month be past to have a good trade, for by that time the water will be abaite' d, which I understand are very high up the cuntrey. The goods I shall want is a hundred iron barrs and 6 chests of sheets. A liso if their be any blew perpetuanoes and broad tapseiles, to be spar 'd out of the Castle, I desire your Worship to send me what quantity you please. Also powder would sell at one ounce per barrel\, otherwise not by reason the Dutch sell it at that rate. For nccessaryes for the fort Mr Chamber s knows better what is wanting than I doe, to whom l reffcr you. 33. Thomas Buckne ll Succondee , 4 June 1686 I have according to your Worships order charged Thomas Taylor's pay in my months account , he dying but two dayes before pay day, so their was due at his death 14a IO.tawhich I have sent your Worship per Mr Innes, but as for what he had I could find nothing but his bed and one coat was sold for 5a, which I paid Mr Nelling [sic:?= Helling] towards his debts in the seller[= cellar]. His bed remayns yet unsold, which I hope your Worship will be pleased to lett me have for 3 angles he owed me since his pay, with what bath been already paid will discharge his forty shillings advance mony and his seller debts. I have received the bread and beaf [= beet], for them I return your Worship all hearty thanks. J shall shortly have occasio n for a sute [= suit] of cloths, which if your Worship have any stuff or good strong silk to sell would desire your Worship you would be pleas'd to lett me know it. 1 shall endeavour to pay what is already due. I have been importuned by Collen Hunter to speak for him to your Worship to grant him a Seconds place here, soe being troubled every day with his importunity have made bold to troblc your Worship not for a Seconds place for him, which with your Worships leave J doe not desire, not as I can [say] any thing against his fidellity in the warehouse, but his proud temper , doubting he would be my master if he were advanced, but he understanding your Worship will send more men doth presume their will be a Serjants place, so desireing me if he could not be Second, that I would speak for the Serjants place, which if their be any such thing ordered if your Worships thinks b.imworthy of it I make bold to speak for him, though I am not very forward in it, knowing his pride, but upon his promise of amendment have done it, soe lcave ing it to your Worships consideration beging excuse for thus troubleing your Worship. 34. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 5 June 1686 Your Worships letter per Mr Chambers is received with the cloth for the Braffo of Taggarado which I shall deliver per first opertunity. As for goods I desire your Worship wou ld be pleased to send me 6 or JOchests of sheets, one case more of Guine stuffs, one case of paper brawles; also blew perpetuanoes and broad tapseiles, of which I have not nominat 'd a quantity , not knowing what supply was in the Castle. Also pewter juggs and brass pans hath been inquir'd for, of which desire a dozen or two to se how they will vend. I made a bad month of May for want of part of these goods, but hope to make a better of this, being suppli ed with these goods this month; and being part of the rains over, and waters abated up the cuntrey, J doc expect a reasonable good trade, from the Ancorsa people, whose cheiftrad e is for these goods and powder if sold for an ounce per barrell, otherwise the Dutch will take that from me, but from the ldooms little is expected at present, they being still at difference with the Wassaws. Cophe is come down with the cano, but I was forced to pay him the last two months before he would goe, which I did to avoid mistrust, for he is very subt ill, and ifhc had mistmsted in the least he would a brought the Capushers in a pallaver and pretend'd they would not lett him goe, also he demandin g after my account was made up I could not charge it, so must defer it tell June account. 35. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 17 June 1686 Your Worships of the 151h instant is received wherein I received an order to sell all goods as the Dutch sell them, which l shall doe and not under, and question not when trade come down but to have as good a share of it as he. Powder vends indefferently but as yet canot advise for a suply, not haveing conveniency to secure it, but shall forward it with all expedition that may be. As for sayes are very bad comodity, but I humbly desire a full supply of those goods I last write of, with additions of 30 or 40 Welch playn s and as many course sletias, and for sheets particularly I desire your Worship would not fail me, if a suply is to be had in the Castle, for all receive d last are gone and a great many more might have been disposed ofl had had them, 1 being forcd to turn away two bendys this day for want of them. 1 have bought a man slave for seaven peas, whome I will send down per sloop. I have also called a pallaver about the man which panyard the slaves and told them of our abuses and losses and that your Worship would not put itup , upon which they desired time and desired me not to writ untill l heard further from them. What they will conclude upon as yett know not, but the sloop shall render advice thereof. The slave called Oldman sayes their is eight months pay due to him on pay day next insueing and that there was four months due when he come up, which I have paid him in part, but he makes a palaver for the whole , so would desire a word of advice from your Worship wether there be soe much due and wheatber 1may pay him or not. Succondee, 20 June 168636. Thomas Bucknell I have per the cano received your Worships letter with just qauantity [sic] of goods mentioned therein, only the bail of green perpetuanoes hath two redd and 18green, and the bale that was sent [as] 25 blew perpetuanoes hath one green therein but 24 blew. As for other sorts of goods I have no occasion for at present as I know of, but if the natives should enquire for any rwill render timely advice thereof. The merrchant[s] were goo up the cuntrey before the cano arriv'd but others are dayly expect' d down, by whom I am in hopes to have better trade than heitherto have had, l being now provided of all they have required. As for abusers of traders or refractory persons I have none at present, how they may prove hence forward I know not, but if otherwise than they should be, I shall render account thereof. I can hear no news of Captain Wood but so soon as I can understand where he is I will with all expedi tion send your Worships letter to him. As for the boysadoes they were certainly missing, but for a note I se none at the opening of them, nither can I find one at my second looking them. An attestation 1 have here down and here inclosed sign'd with myne one[= own] hand, to be signed allso by Collin Hunter at Cape Coast, he being all was present, for I not expecting any such matter us'd not to call anybody but those were concerned, but for the future I will call one white man besides my warehouse keeper I now seeing it will be convenient on such occasion. Pray send me word per Mr Innes what particulars is to be given on the Companys account to the Capushers of this place at danceing tjmes which is four dayes hence ,69 also pray the price of the brass pans and pewte r juggs , or if time pennits pray send a full invoyce of all sorts goods, that for the future whatsoever sort of goods be sent me I may know the price readily, also what powder will be allow'd to the forts use. I have sent those armes I write went by the sloop , in the cano, they being detained by the negligence of those I orderd to se them aboard. 37. Thomas Bucknell Succondec , 21 June 1686 This accompanys Mr Chambers, who is come down according to your Worship order. I went down this morning to Captain Assum to know what answer they would return your Worship about the pallaver, the which I perceive I am like to doe noe good about, their desireiog time being only to drive it ofto se if you would bury it in oblivion, for they make a palaver that the man came not to rob the factory but to dig for gold as he pretended at first, that he panyard the slaves because we shot him for nothing, and they told me in short that the man was run away and when he could be found again he should be examined whether he came to rob us or noe, and that was all the answer they said they could give me, upon which Jmade them answer that as they had made a promis upon the first panyaring of our slaves, to deliver the ofendcr to me within eight dayes and have not done it, that they had taken the pallaver upon their one [= own] heads, and they ought to make good our losses, and as they had been short in their answer your Worship would be as resolute to have sattisfaction, on which they made noe answer, but had the grace (though they will not give sattisfaction) to demand their dues, and tell me their danceing time is ten dayes hence and their was a dashe from the Company, so I would desire your Worship to send me word what is to be given on that account. I have not taken above three mark of gold yett this month besides charges , T haveing the ill fortune still. As the traders come down they want those goods I am out of, they being so fickell minded, that I know not what to advise for except 1 have a full supply of all sorts, for somtimes goods shall lie buy me two months and not be asked for and of a suddain they would be goo if I had never so many, therefore I would desire that favour of your Worship once to be at the c[h]ar ge of a cano with these goods hereafter mentioned except any of them be on board the sloop allready, and for the future 1will give more timely advice what is wanting, for the sloop is now arriv'd and I have been in want of severall of those goods I have advised for this month. The goods I am in want of is vizt IO chests of sheets, one hundred narrow nicconees, forty green Welch playns, and as many course sletias, and for blew perpetuanoes and broad tapseiles as many as can be spared me, twenty brass pans and pewter jugs, forty half firkins taJlow, one case of Guine stuffs, also rum for I spend all [so] that Twas forced to buy of the Dutch brandy to give away. Their is mentioned in your Worships letter of the 8th of Aprill last 21 boysadoes in a bale no.11, and I not questioning have charged myself with soe many in my two month account, 1 not haveing occasion to looking it tell Satterday last [when] opening of it for a customer I found but 18 theirin, so I humbly desire of your Worship that the mistake might be lookt over and the 3 boysadoes sent me. Succondee, 25 June 1686 38. Thomas Bucknell Your Worships is received with the full number of the Guine stuffs, paper brawls, broad nicconces, brass pans, pewter jugs, iron bars and powder therein, also the hogshead of lime, and two guns and carrigees. As for the powder it came unexpected , otherwise would have advised what parcels it should bave come in, for the natives are altogether for quarter barrells and half at the biggest, but the whole they will not buy,70 so if there be any empty half and quarter barrells l would desire your Worship to send them me and I will take care to put them up in such quantitys here. Pray send per the return the narrow oicconees, green Welch playns and tallow mentioned in my last letter. Per tbe sloop I have sent down the man slave I last writ of, allso Collin Hunter, and have nayled up his chest presently on receipt of the letter, as your Worship order'd, but a key has he none, for he keeping the ware house opened it with the sheet chest key belonging to the factory, for he hath none but sheet chests of his own, he having sold his other some time since, which could not send down, Thaving never another. He also hath a few pipes earthenware in another sheet chest, which have not sent down , but have them in my possession. Edward Andrew is now come down in the sloop, being so sick and weak that be is uncapeable of any servis here. l have also sent down thre[e] old musquets , two old bandilers and the sword which the carpenter broak, they being unfit for service, so would desire your Worship to send others in their roome, for we have but one musquet and one sword in the factory. Pray send some musquett shott and three pounders for the canons and granado shells unfitt, with some the last rum was in. Have sent down one broken carrage to be mended or anotherbrimstone , aod Hugh Hilling will fitt them here. I have also retum'd the two cask sent. Succondee, 29 June 1686 39. Thomas Buckne ll Have received your Worships letter per Mr Chambers, and also the goods both per sloop and caoo. I have also sent your Worships letter to Mr Wood on Sunday last, and in order to the contents thereof he is now makeing the best of his way to Cape Corso. As for news to windward I here of non at present , only in the road 2 Dutch interlopers and one Portugues. The dancing time is now here and I have given the Capushers the Company dashes mention'd in their at,rreemeot, that is one green perpetuano , one broad tapseile, three sheets and an ankor .of brandy. Pray send word whether I may pay the slave called Old Man what he demands , which is 8 months pay due the I8th instant. 4 months as he saith was due to Cape Corso when he first came and 4 months here, which he dayly pallavers for. Per the next return of the sloop J will send my accompt and monys. 40. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 3 July 1686 Your Worshipsof the2dinstant is receivedwith the two bottles of cordialls for Mr Chambers, who is now something better though in a ill order still but no bad but that he goesabouthis business.He humblypresents hisservis to your Worshipand reh1rns all heartythanksfor your kindnessto him and doth desire to se the sloopup and the tiles laid upon the house, and then God willing with your Worships leave he doth design to goe for Cape Corso. For ships to windward I here of none at present. The Dutch interlopers are at Cornmenda, so I have sent to Mr Cross to inquire affter the ships at St Thomay and to give your Worship account thereof, and as to the Portugues I wish I had known your Worshipspleasure sooner, for he !yes now at the Mine. Al! news I can possible here ofI shall render advice with all expedition,which I will diligently inquire affter. 41. Thomas Bucknell Succondce, 9 July 1686 These lines are to give yourWorship account that the 7th instant a Dutch interloper was in thisroade that came from St Thoma, whom I went aboard ofto know what shipshe se there, who sayeth he nithcr saw nor heard of any ship there or anywhere elce uponthe Coast from thence heither.Also at intrimof time I was writeing these lines, a greatship passed by thisplace showingFrench collers,whom I would have sent aboard but the blacks had intelligence before he a1Tiv'dthe[ = that] he was a pyrat, so that I could not gett a cano to goe of to hjm for no mony, by reason of whichI can give no farther account of him, but haveing such information by the natives, alsoyour Worshipdesireing advice of all ships, I thought good to dispatch this letter with all expedition to advise thereof. 42. Thomas Bucknell Succondec, J7 July ! 686 .Thesegoeing by Cophes cano which brought him up are to inform your Worship that Mr Jones lies very bad of a feaver. His cano came from Shuma on this day nightlast past todesire me to send some foules [= fowls] and a little butter,which I did sendhim, but the s!oop71 anchoring this day a little to leward of this road his canocamea shore againc andFrancis Nixson in her, who told his master was very bad and that he could not stirr out of his cabin no other wayes than he was lifted, nor hath taken any rest this 3 or 4 dayes, soe desiring me to send him a little diascordium, 72 which I did and a little of the surfeit water73 your Worship sent Mr Chambers, which I hope will doe him good. By report of the man he is in a bad condition and soe are the sick men in the forte, for I doe realy beleive without the wonderful! work of God Anthony Medcalk [sic] to be a dead man. Also Hasting lngram lies very ill and the carpenter is little better, but Hugh Hilling is indefferent well againe. Mr Chambers [and] John Veasey are, God be thanked , in their perfect health. I am informd by Cophe that Tecodee the Idoom Capushere will come down 7 dayes hence to a croom which lies above Butterue ,74 and hath sent for the Capusheres of Succondee , Tagarado and Yankee at the croom and another Capusher at a croom a little to leward of Yankes croom, to meet him their about a pallaver , but conserning what J know not, for the Capusheers carry it very private, and Cophe had not known it if it had not been for Captain Crew, who is a great freind to Cophe, who told him but bid him keep private. I asked Cophe ifhe told him what the pallaver was and he said no, but be told me be did beleivc the Idooms and Antia people were not good freinds, so if your Worship Iike well of it I doc think to send Cophe with a good dashe to Ticcodee to here what the pallaver is, as soon as I here he is come down, which Cophe hath promisd to give me notice of. I was told per the canomen that he se 3 ships and a sloop to windward in the offing, but what they were he could give no account off. [PS] The cano I sent to Cape Coast to inform your Worship of our sickly condition is not yett retum'd. Succondee, 19 July 1686 43. Thomas Bucknell Your Worships per the An Sloop is received with the iron barrs, great and small shot, nine musquetts and four cutlashes and bandileirs for the fforte, mentioned therein, but 5 of the musquetts I have sent back per the sloop to be now[= new] fitted, for they are out of order and unfitt for servis. The cano with medcines arrived here on Sunday morning last, but to late for Anthony Medcalfe who that day about one aclock departed this life, for whom I am heartily sorry for I beleive I shall not have the like quiet man in his room. As for what he had is alIscarse worth la, he haveing nothing worth taken notice of but one blew shirt, which those that stript him clame as due to them. Hasting Ingram and William Davis are both bad of a feaver, the most of their grive [= griefj lies in their head, also want of rest, but I hope those medicnes received from the Doctor with Gods blessing will doe them good. I have here inclosed my June account. Also per Mr Innes your Worship will receive 3 marks, 5 ounces, 5 angles and four taccoes of gold, being the ballance thereof. The carpenter was desireous to goe down in the sloop, soe haveing nothing more but what the Black carpenter can doe I have complyd with his desire. 44. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 28 July 1686 These goes per Mr Chambers are to desire your Worship to send me per first conveyance 50 silke longees, and as many large brass pans per next return, also one bale of blew perpetuanoes, if they are not all disposed of. The George sloop arrived in this roade yesterday, where they still remayn , not haveing a wind to carry them up any further, from whome your Worship will receive a letter per Mr Chambers. 75 Asforourhealths weareallindifferentwellexceptHastings Ingram who lyes in a week condition still but I am yett in hopes of his recovery. I am almost certain that there will be war betwixt the !dooms and Antea people, for about three dayes since their came an (doom trader to this town to buy goods, of whome I took twelve ounces of gold which he sent per his man to the ffactory , himselfe resideing at a Antea mans house being one of his freinds in this town, being afraid to go out least the people should kill him, but he ventering to the forte about some diffe rence in the layeing out his mony, I bid Cophe ask him of the affaires of the Idoomes how they stood effected to these people, and what was the reason Longbeard 76 came not down from Tiecodees as he used to doe in Mr Whiteings time,77 who answered Cophe that he was affraid and that the !dooms had much mony to lay out but are affraid of these people panyarring them if they come down and that there would be a war betwixt them. Also one of this town told me that they expected war with them shortly. Captain Assum did also desire me to gett more gunns, but l could not gett anything out of him concerning the war, but bid me make hast and write and told me more guns was very good and he wanted them, but Cophe told me Captain Assum had sent two slaves up the cuntrey to watch when Teccodee comes down and give him notice with all speed, and that he beleives according as the pallaver ends with him their will be peice [= peace] or warr. 45. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 11 Aug. 1686 These are to advise your Worship ofmy safe arrivall at Succondee. Those goods specified in your Worships letter whereof 4 of the Welch playnes are very much damag'd, and whereas your Worship orderd ten men and eight women, some of them being taken sick so that the work was not so forward as was expected. Yesterday a Portuguez weigh'd out of this roade, who informes me Captain Wood is very sick and is no hier than Dickecove. 78 1humbly beg your Worships pardon for detaining the cano so long, I being suddainJy and violently taken with a castiJ1g and purging , soe I could not dispatch him sooner, but (I thank God) it is over with me and I hope it may be the better for me in my future health, I bringing up abundance oftought [? = taut] yellow couller. We want a few more 6 peny and 4 penny nailes for the forts use, also if the smiths are not to busie, would desire your Worship be pleased to let them make a few duft tailes [= dovetails] for cloth windows for the forte. I have here inclosd a list of those names[ = names of those] sent down, whereof Obin was ordered to tarry. I was forced to send him down to safe his life which is threten'd, he being taken with another mans wife, whereby a pallaver arose and two towns people are wounded. Also 8 women being above mentioned I have sent but six their being nessess ity for them. Succondee, 21 Aug. 1686 46. Thomas Bucknell Your Worships per Captain Deals man is received and shall obey your Worships order therein specified, but I understand per Captain Poyston [sic], who arrivd here last night, that Captain Deal lyes between Cape Trees Pointas and Axim , so untill such time as 1here he is arrivd to the Brandyburgs fort I will entertain him here. Captain Poston presents his humble Servis to your Worship, and doth design to send his boat down to Cape Coast this night. As for goods I have no occasion for except there hath been a supply of sheets, broad tapsei les and blew perpetuanoes , for the which goods rcould take mony enough, for otherwise I shall make but a bad month of it. Captain Brandfeild s blew perpetuanoes haveing carrid away all the mony, and now also Captain Poston being arriv'd, I doe expect to take but little, for whilst ships lyes in the road I may lock my scales in my chest, and do no damagg to the Company. Aug. 1686Succondee,2347. Thomas Bucknell l haveing sent Captain Dales man on board his ship per the return of the caoo received this inclos' d from the Captain, 79 with a line to request me to send it to your Worship imediatly on receipt of the same, for which purpose I have now sent cano, I baveing no other business at present nor no occasion for goods except there be a suply out of Captain Brand[f]ield of blew perpetuanoes, sheets, broad tapseiles. Captain Daile now rides at Dickecove. Captain Poston is gon to Commenda. I am most intollerably lrobled with rats in the warehouse. They now begin to damnifie the goods, I haveing found several! things lcnawed [= gnawed] per them. What further mischief they have done lam uncensible of, untill I overhall the warehouse, which I am now about to doe. If any man in the Castle can advise me how to distroy them, to advise me of the means; niether can I gett a catt any where. 48. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 7 Sept. 1686 These accompany's Captain Coffee by whome I have sent my months account with three marks, four ounces, three angles and four taccoes of gold, being the ballance thereof, the which l would have sent before but that Cophe said he would goe down this night, and my takeings being small and no other business presenting, I thought it not worth the sending a man down and charge of cano, knowing of this opertunity by Coffee. The slaves will make an end this week, so I would desire your Worship to send an order which are to remayne here, and also (if they be ready) to send what gunns more your worship designs for this place before the slaves goe down, that they may help gett them on the battlements. As for oyster shells I could buy none, the saltponds 80 being so full of water which canot be lett out. Pray send word how much pay Samuell Jones must have per month and allso Mr Chambers sallery. 1 have had very bad trade ever since the ships arriv'd here, blew perpetuanoes carrying away all the mony that I can take noething. 49. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 21 Sept. l 686 These are to advise your Worship that the slaves have finished there wo rk and only waite your Worships order for their comfog down, and also desire your Worship to send me a chest or two ofmu ndees, and if their hath been a supply out of these last ships either of blew pcrpetuanoes, broad tapseiles , sheets, or tallow, I humbly desire your Worship to send me a supply of them here, for the want of which goods l take but little mony they being the chiefe of the vendable goods in this place. Also powder would vend if it were inh alfb arrells, for want of which it lyes a hand. Pray advise me whether Captain Assume ought to be paid his custom 81 every pay day that the wight[= white] men are paid or to reckon but 12 months to the year, also how much Samuell Chambers and Samuell Jones must have per month. I know not what to doe with the rats, they damage so much good[s] that would make one mad to se, especia lly the woollen goods. They eat wholes [= holes] in the boysadoes, Welch plains and blankets that I can run my fist in them. I have here beneath sent your Worship account of all the damagd goods in the warehouse , the most of which is damagd per the rats, and how to remidy it I canot tell. I have presumed to use some of the scaffelling bauks to make platforms for the goods, to prevent their harboring under the sides of the old nine hand cano that was broak in fetching stones, which Jhad laid at the bottom of the warehouse to set the cases upon to keep the goods from the damp flower, at the removall of which we killed eight ratts of a great biggness and destroy'd two nests of six young ones apeice, but some escap'd our hands, doe what we could. What further to doe to prevent more damages 1 canot tell. I have spoild their harbors and made all passages free that they cannot secure themselves from a good cat, but that I have is to(o] little, soe I humbly desire your Worship to send me a bigger if it can be procurd. Here be rats almost able to deal with catts. Also would desire your Worship to send me some rum for I have none in the factory. Goods damaged in the warehouse 6 boysadoes 12 green perpetuanoes 8 green Welch playns I2 stript carpits IO broad nicconees 11 ditto narrow 2 narrow tapseiles 9 Guine stuffs most of the blankets, all the sheets. Succondee , 24 Sept. 1686 50. Thomas Bucknell Your Worships of the 22d instant is received with the mundees and rum. Also I have received the four hand cano and have sent down the seaventeen hand cano, which now accompany's Mr Chambers, who also hath taken with him five men slaves, so that their now remayns here but six men and eight women, they being left here for the building the wall quite out to the brink of the hill, as your Worship orderd per Mr Chambers. As for your Worships order concerning the goods it shall be dilligently observ'd. As for Captain Cophe, he hath serv'd here ever since the t 11October last until! the time of his last departur e for Cape Coast, but I have paid him four months sallery, that is from the first of January to the 23dof Aprill last. The reason that I paid him for those months and not for the months before was his goeing down to Cape Coast in December and coming up in January [and he] told me your Worship had paid him lo January the first and ordered for the future he should be paid here, but I haveing taken but little mony at the time of his last goeing down, I would not pay him from April the 23d to that time. Pray send perticular order how many slaves shall remayn here for a constancy, which if your Worship be pleas'd to spare them four would be convenient of men slaves and one woman. Less will not be able to carry a burden from waterside to the forte and the towns people are of such a sordid nature that sometimes they will be hyrd to help us and somtimes they will not. Niether can a sentenell be conveniently kept with less and other business done, for we fetch out wood and water at a great distance from the factory, and there is one dry time in the year which we are forcd to fetch our water betwixt three and four miles of. Succondee, 2 Oct. 168651. Thomas Bucknell I have by the bearer hereof sent down my September accounts with three mark, one ounce, thirteen angles and eleven taccoes of gold, being the ballance thereof. Also I have sent one man slave which I bought for seaven peas, and desire your Worship will be pleasd to send per the return of the cano the carriage for the gunns, which lyeth unmount'd here. As for goods I have not occasion for at present , here being little trade and Dutch interlopers always passing two[= to) and from which carryes away all the mony, and the people of this place have gott such a hant [= haunt] a goeing aboard, and find the sweetness thereof so much that they will keep there mony two or three months for a ship, whereby they mine our trade, which will scarce ever be better except a means be found to stop there progress that way, for there comes a considerable supply of mony to the place but the ships take it all. One[ = on] Sunday the 26th of Septembe r the Cabashers mett under a boom of cocomutt trees behind the twone [= townc) and sent for me and the Dutchman, and going to them to know there business the[y) offered us fetishes to drink, 82 upon which we went a little from them to consult about it and after agreement betwixt ourselves, we refused it, except they would take a ffitish to full:fill the articles concluded upon at our first settleing by both our Generalls, especia lly in that clause of trading aboard,83 upon which they answerd that they bought nothing aboard but what we could not fu[r]nish them with, and that the cuntrey people came down and went aboard and that they could not help. Unto that we replyd, as for what niether of us could supply them with they might buy freely aboard , and for what the cuntrey people bought aboard should be no palaver one[ = on] them, one condition ifwe offerd to panyar those goods they should not assist the cuntrey people against us, but affter a Jong palaver and many equivocations fecht up per them they said they would go aboard for they could buy things cheaper there than ofus, soe finding [them] so short we were as shorte as they, and told them playnly if the ships should take there mony if war came down the ships should secure them and that we would take there goods per force, as they had desir'd forts they should know they have fortes, upon which the pallaver was broke up tell Captain Assume was well, who being indisposed in his health was not there, so I humbly desire your Worship to advise me on what account ifwe should agree on a palaver I may take a fitisb, for l being under command, canot take it except your Worship be pleas'd to maintain it. Succondee, 18 Oct. 1686 52. Thoma s Bucknell These are to desire your Worsh.ip to send me on sight hereof a quantity of rangoes to the vallue of a mark and halfe or two mark of gold, for I have sold all I had to one man and have two bendyes of gold of his in my hands for more of them, which I promis'd he should have in two dayes; therefore I humbly desire your Worship to send them with all expedition, and lett them be very good, foe[ = for] we had like to have parted about the whiteness of some of those I had. Also I want a supply of knives, broad stript sattens, Guine stuffs and narrow nicconee s; 1 have lost the taken [= taking] a considerable sum of mony for want of blew perpetuanoes , broad tapseiles, sheets and tallow, which are the cheife vendable comodity here, and the Dutch are suppl yd with all of them, which is a greate hindranc e to my takein gs. I am now to advise your Worship ofa unhappy accident , that is the untimely death of John Veasey, the manner thus one Satterday the 2d instant the ffiscall 84 and book keeper of the Mine came to overhall the Dutch ffactory and on the morrow sent for John Veasey to shave them, whome they sent home drunck. In the affternoone they came to our fforte and stayd there till night, and then they told me they had a good supper provides [sic] at the Dutch factory, and desired me to goe with them, which 1did, and as we satt at supper, John Veasey came in with a tuck85 in his hand and one of the slaves with him, and told me it was dark, and he was come to see me home ; so the Dutch would have him sitt down to supper and gave him wine and punch freely, so I fearing he would be drunk bid him begon , but they importuneing him, he would not goe untill they made him drunck , so seing him in that condition, I bid the slave carry him home and come again for me, which he did; but as the Dutch bricklayer sayeth the slave goeing to carry him down the ladder which goes up to the Dutch mans house lett him fall, where I beleive he broke bis neck for in two bowers affter he died not speaking one word. He hath left two gold rings, a good serge sute and several! odd things which per the next I shall give a pcrticular account of, which now I could not the man hastening me to send for his rangoe s. Captain Nanter past by here the IO instant in the morning and I guess gott up as high as Dickecove that night. Succondee , 20 Oct. 1686 53. Thoma s Bucknell h instant is received with the narrow nicconees, Guine Your worships of the 191stuffs, broad stript sattins, broad tapseiles, rangoes and rum speciffied therein. The slaves have not yett ffinished their work so I have not sent them down , but by the end of the month they will ffinish there business, so shall send them down with my monthly accompt in the four hand cano, and whereas your Worship write I might keep four men and three women for the forts use, this is to lett your Worship understand that here is not four men your Worship would be willing to spare, for here is but six men here and Yanke 86 and Joyce, your Worship writes for them perticular and I cannot make four besides them without the carpenter , whom I presume your Worship did not think off, soe desire your worship would be pleas 'd to send another, that can be convenient ly spared in his roome, bopeing your Worship will not lessen the number , for the ill convenience that I should find thereby, amongst sordid sort of people who will not lay a hand to anything but just when there one[ = own] humor serves them. An account of John Veascy's things have here inclosd, some of which I shall dispose of here, the rest I will send down at the months end with the produc e of the rest As for his pay all the white men here can wittness he owed me all his full two months pay which he did not ffully live out. As for ships to windward I here of none. 54. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 2 Nov. (16]86 I have per the bearer hereof sent down my October accounts with 6 marks, six ounces, ten angles of gold being the ballance lhereof , also one man slave which I bought for seaven peas. Likewise there accompanys the canoe all the slaves except three men, three women which are to remayn to the ffactorys servis, and one woman that is very sick so that she could not accompany the rest. I would also have sent John Veaseys chest and cloths but the cano was so full with the slaves that they could not carry it. Pray send up per return of the canoe some more rangoes , for the man that bought the last hath been here, and hath bought since my account was write most of those which are made remaining in my account and saith he will be here in a little time for tenn beodyes more of them. Also pray send some more match and cartherige paper for the forts use, and if there be ever a slave your Worship will spare in the room of the carpenter I humbly desire your Worship will be pleased to lett me have [him], your Worship ordering four men to be here whereof here remains but three. Samuell Jones told me at pay day your Worship promised to allow him something more than his ordinary sallery for looking affter cleaning the arms, which if soe I desire your worship to send me word how much he must have advanced. [PS] Pray send a lock bolt for the back door in the wall of the fforte . Succondee, 6 Nov. [16]86 55. Thomas Bucknell Your worships with the rangoes are received and also the table. I have now (as] your worship ordered sent down the black carpenter and allso all the slaves except three men and three women which remayne to the ffactorys servis. I would have sent them in the last cano according as I writ in my letter, but they had so much lumber to carry with them that I was afraid of the canos oversetting and so to have lost the Company mony: but now your worship ordring the carpenter to be sent them all, for it would have cost halfe the charge to send one alone. As for Captaindown, I thought good to send the four hand cano once againe which will carry Nanter I cannot Jearne where abouts he is at present but I am informd per the man that bought the rangoes that there is never a ship betwixt this place and Axim; but as soon as I shall understand where he is I shall give your worship advice thereof. About a week since there came Yankee from his croom with all his men in arms and other Antea Cabusheers with there men in arms all to Succondee town, bringing a great complaint to Captain Assum that the Cheife of Sbumab 87 had been up Shumah river88 into the ldooms cuntrey and had carryd two canoes loaded with powder and shott and arms for the ldooms to come down to destroy the Antea people, upon which they went up in a pallaver to the Dutch Cheife who gave them many fine words and perswaded them it was noe such thing, so after they had been with him they came to me to know if we would assist them and to desire me to write for more gunns, to which 1gave them many faire promises , which very well sattisfied them, but in two dayes affter there came one !doom man down and told them all the pallaver was falce, be said the Cheife of Shumah was there but he came to sell those goods, and that the Idooms had panyard them and would not pay him for them, upon which they were all sattisfied and went to their crooms. Now whether it might be policy of the Dutch to sent that man down I know not, nor yett can I give credditt to the blacks, but the occasion of my writeing is to know whether if at any time such a thing should suddenly happen your worship would have me side with the upland people, or watterside people, or whether to resist either of them, for although we live among the Antea people yett the upland people are our merrchants. I also desire your worships advice about letting the Antea people in our Castle, which I understand they all depend upon, if wars should happen, whjch I fear would be very ill convenient without it were two or three of the old Capusheers, for the Dutch will certainly side with !dooms and tbese being a sordid rugged people ifwe should lett them all into our forte and the Dutch resist them they would overpower us and fire at the Dutch from our forte, and although I cannot credclitt any such thing, yet least it should unexpectedly happen I humbly desire your worships advice in itt. 56. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 12 Nov. 1686 I have received your worships with the goods, which I have disposed off for the best advantage I can. I hear noe news of any ships as yett, butt as soone as I shall I will render advise thereof. And for the Duch affaires I hear nothing more att present, not haveing any convers with them this three or four dayes, the cheife being gone to Shumah , and all things are seeming quiett amoung the natives, butt here is little trade, neither hath there bene there any !dome trader downe since the pallavar happened. I will dive into there affaires as farr as possibly I can, but they are subtill and close to themselves and verry wary in there proceedings. I am alsoe to advise your worshipe that here is a new Chiefe for the Duch. The last haveing imbase ld [= embezzled ] the Companys goods, was taken by the ffiscoll and carryed to the Mine about six weekes since, and the under ffactor of Axim succedes him as ffactor here, a wary man and kinsman to the Generali of the Mine,89 upon which he presumes on greater matters then the former did, as the stoping the Negroes going aboard , for the Ffrancis passing by here he called all the Cabusheers and told them ifhe see any canoe goe ofto that ship he wou ld fire into the downe [= towne) presently and putt all the Cabusheers in irons, unto which they made him little answer but only told him they would not goe aboard. This I was told by the Black which I sent with my accompts to Cabo Corsoe, for ifl be there and he making pallavar against there coming aboard it is only interlopers but if I am absentte he is against Inglish Company's shipps. Pray order per next oppertunity some match, chathrige [= cartridge] paper and twine for the ffortts use for wee have none. 57. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 14Nov. 1686 Tbjs morning came to my hands the inclosed from Captain Nanter which he desired should be sent to your Worship with all expedition. 90 He now writtes [?= rides] in Cabra road.91 Pray ift here be storee of blew perpetuanoes come over send mee some more of them, and alsoe if any quantyty of sheets, desire your worship would be pleased to loade a canoe with those two commodityes. 58. Thomas Buckne ll Succondee, 18Nov. 1686 Your worships of the 16th is received, with tenn chestes of sheets and l bale blew perpettuanoes, alsoe the match and paper for the fforttes use. As for the goods I doubt not butt they are come to a good markctte , according to rattes they sell art, and one angle a sheet. As for your worships order that is 10a a perpettuanoe, concerning the gunns upon the ffortt I will observe, but desire your worship per first oppertunity to send what more guns are designed for this place, for here is nott gunns below [sic: ?= beyond] to answer a salute. Your worships letter to Mr Elwes92 I will send forward this night. Per this canoe I have sent John Veaseys cheste and remaynner of his things. I have sou Id the 2 gold ringes, for four anglees of gold, 2 paire ofwhitte sleeves for one angle, one checkard shirtte three taccoees, three playne whitte neckcloaths and two ditto lacett for l Ota, which in all is 2a Ita, which I will send with my monthly account. Have not elce only I have sold more of John Veaseys things, his hone93 for la, 1 paire of old blew drawers, Bible and Practice of Piety 94 7ta. I hear Captain Butteram is aboutt Axim. Succondec, 3 Dec. 1686 59. Thomas Bucknell By the bearer hearofl have sentt down my November accounts with four markes, seaven ounces, fiveteen angles and six tacoes of gold being the ballance thearof, and your worsh ip wiJI receive by the bearer seaven angles, eight taccoes gold being for two gold rings and few cloths sold of John Veseys mentioned in my letter should have had a good trade this month butt Captain Buttrams arrivall frustratedof 18th November. I being suplyed with the most vendable goods did thincke I sentt being all taken the beginning oftbe month. Pray send a iockbolte and padlockmy expectation, for as soone as hee was heard ofmy trade ceased, the mony I have for the last <lore[= door] case which was sentt. Succondee, 8Dec. 1686 60. Thomas Bucknell This morning I received your Worships oftbe 9th instant by Mr Robert Elwes95 and Mr Halford, and according to the contents thereof have obeyed your Worships order in inventoring the warehouse and all other materiall s belonging to the Royall Company in this ffactory signed with all our hands. As for the three Guine stuffs your worship writes is undercharged , is not soe in my coppy. Whether I have mistook the ffigure in those sent down, l know not, but my coppy makes four hundred sixty six remayning, which I think is right.lfnot so [ms. 'se'] in those sent your Worship , it is an error. I return your Worship many thanks for your kind invitatio n at Christmas. Succondee, 11 Dec. 168661. Thomas Bucknell I have received your worships per Mr Elwes , and according to your worships order togather with Mr Elwes have the second time taken an inventory of the Roya ll Companys concerns in the ffactory, and have valued the damnified goods accord ing to the best of our judgments, which J hope will be to satisfac tion of your Worship. Succondee, l 8 Dec. 168662. William Halford I think it my duty to return your Worship my humble thanks that you were pleased to send me as second to an outffacto ry, whereby I shall gaine experie nce of the trade and be more capable of serving the Royall Company when required. I doe promis your Worship, that while I remayne here I will keep the goods and all the concerns of the Royall Com pany to me willed to my charge by my Cheife in as good a condition and as free from damagd as possib le lyes in my power, as I will at any other place where ever your Worship pleases to command me. Succondee,30Dec. 168663. Thomas Bucknell These accompany Mr William Halford and is only to advise your Wo rship ofmy safe arrival! al Succondee ,96 and that the East India Merchant is now in the roade, I haveing nothing more of moment at present nor no occasion for goods, here haveing been but small trade in my absence. Jwould have sent down my accounts , but Mr Halford being desirous to depart presently according to the contents of your Worships order I had not time to make them up and write them. 64. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 12 Jan. 1686/7 By the bearer your Worship will receive my Decembers accounts with five mark, six ounces, six angles, and one taccoes of gold, which with five marks paid Mr Humfryes at Christmas is the ballance thereof , which l hope will come safe to your Worships hands, which I have been doubtfu l\ of and that is one reason I sent them not before, fearing the canomen should take the mony from the boy, for the last time the cano went down with Mr Halford your Worship giveing the boy his letter to be gone he called the canomen to gett the cano ready and they being unwilling to goe untill the next night and the boy wou ld not tarry , they beat him at Cabo Corso and tore his beads from off his neck and thrcatend to heave him overboard and at Cornmenda they would have beat him againe, Samuell Jones haveing much adoe to hinder them, which made the boy himselfe afraid to carry mony down with them, but the boy haveing found other canomen of his freinds who me he thought he might trust, I would have sent him by them but was hindered by the afforesaid canomen. I asked them the reason why they beat the boy, they !aught at it and told me they came not to talk of that , they came for their mony, which I told them they should not have untell I made the Cabushers acquainted with it, but I had as good done nothing for tell them[= the Cabushers] what you will, they will only give a few good words and ask for a bottle of brandy. Perhaps they will sitt and chide the transgressors and he att the time shall stand and laugh in their face ; but they wi 11 be sure to make a pallaver enough upon a white man if they can pick anything to build upon, for about 2 dayes before the date hereof a French ship of 12 guns and seaventy men came to an anchor at Taccarado , and yesterday the Commander and his Doctor came ashore here and while I was entertaining them Captain Assum came to the ffort , whome I sent for upstairs and set Charles Dean sentinell at the stares foot to keep the rest of the blacks down , it being their rude custome if strangers be here to run all upstares, which they would then have done, but being stopt four of them fell upon Charles Dean and beat him, which Samuell Jones seing took up a sword and struck one of them on the head with the flatt of it which drew blood of him (and that was as much as it did doe) and likew ise drove the rest out of the fort, but the next day the Cabushers made a pallaver upon it and demanded twelve angles , which I was forced to give them, being unwilling to make resistanc e befor I gave your Worship account thereof , but if your Worship thinks fitt we might fetch it back againe, for they have as much reason to pay for stricking a white man as we for stricking a black, this being the third time they have struck a sentinell in the fort, and they are so impudent , that except we use force to keep them in aue, we shall be pulled out of the fort , and they laugh at us because we doe not, telling us our gunns stands for a show, we dare not use them. I have a cask which will hold water for a months time and more , and wood and provision I can gett in, for if a pallaver happen they canot hold long, they being but weak only dominating s011 of people , the Dutch have but three men and yet he fires at all the canos that goes aboard [so] that now they dare not Jett him se any goe. I have had little or no trade this month and am afraid little I shall have, the Dunkedors and Wassaws being now at warrs with the !dooms so that nothing sells but powder, 97 which the Dutch take all the mony , for theirs being in quarter barrells, if their be any halfe barrells at Cabo Corso I could sell them here but whole they will not buy. The inclosed is a letter from Mr Bayly who now rides at Tagarado. 98 65. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 18 Jan. I 686/7 I have se nt down this cano on purpose to give your Worship an accompt that the four hand cano is not yett returned which Thursday night last I sent down with my December account and mony and one man slave, also with a letter from Mr Bayly, who hath ride here ever since for an answer, by the black that used to bring my accounts, which I pray God to be safe come to your Worships hands, for I am much trobled I have not yet heard from him, fearing some mischance should befall him (which God forbid) but hope rather your Worship hath been the occasion of his stay, for ifno casuall accident is happend question not his being at Cape Coast, but I humbly beg the favour of your Worship speedily to dispatch this cano to give me advice whether he hath been at Cape Coast and wheather your Worship hath detained him, for his delay so long doth much trouble my mind with fearfull imaginations, but trusting in God and hopeing for the best I patiently wait your Worships answer. In my letter by the boy which I hope is received I gave your Worship account of a French ship of 12 gunns and 70 men rideing at anchor at Taccarado, who now have settled a factory there and very closely can-ied it untell they had landed twenty one men and three great gunns which are to remayne their. The Dutch haveing notice of it sent the Fiscall to speak with the French Captain about it, who came this morning and brought four souldiers to remayne in their fort, but the French ship was gon to Commenda whether[ = whither] the Fiscall imediately ffollows them.99 J hear they expect two more great ships down every day. 66. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 20 Jan. 1686/7 Your worships of the 17th instant is received with the twelve balfe barrells of powder and twenty narrow nicconees, which being the two only commodityes now vendable here I hope they will fetch some mony, for as yett I have but little. The nicconees according to your Worships order I shall hold at 3a per piece. I have also rece ived your Worships letter of the 19th instant which accompany William Woodmansey, Nicholas Rutty and John Shorter, which is cheifly to caution me to be wary of my unwelcome neibours the French, the contents of which 1 will carefuJly and dilligently observe, and upon all occasions shall render timely advice of all news, aJTivall of ships and whatsoever elce I can here. Concerning them the blacks tell me they work night and day in pallazadoring a peice of ground intire to itselfe and placeing three great gunns to the most advantage, and every Fren ch man bath a forked stick upon which they hang their peices loaded and bandilers full of powder, and wheresoever they remove they caJTY them with them and stick it by them, and I hear they are well provided with necessarys upon all ocasions. The ship has gon down to settle another factory at Ampena, 100which is all at present I can give account of concerning them, and for further adviceconcerning the blacks I can say no more than what I last wrote of, that is CharlesDean stopping them from goeing upstaires into the hall four of them threw himdown and beat him, which Samuel Jones seing struck one of them and drew blood,for which we were forced to pay twelve angles. I doe not desire to make anydisturbance to the Company prejudice, nither will doe anything, abso lutenecessity excepted, before I render your Worship advice if it be matter thatrequires consideration, least unadvisedly I bring damage upon myselfe, only Iwould have them so much in awe, that they should not dare to strike a sentrey, forputting up such abuses with goods given them I fear will incourage them to makedisturbances to gett dashes, and I am glad 1had a civil! man sentine ll, for somedesperate men in that place would have gon near to have shott them , it being acommon opinion amoung many that the law bears them out in such cases. 67. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 24 Jan. 1686/7 Your Worships last letter commanding me to render speedy advice of all ships arrivall, I have sent this cano on purpose to give your Worship account that there isnow ridcing at Tagaradoe a Barbados interloper , a small sloope of three gunns andeight men , haveing but little goods the cheife whereof is Bencen cloths,' 01 rumand suggar, they have a few perpetuanoes and nicconees , but these they will vendfor nothing but slaves , refuseing mony for them. I have likewise an account by theblack that there is two English ships at Dickecovc, but I am not certain of the truththereof. The French haveing pallazadored a peicc of ground at Taccarado and are all gon on board ship againe except three which stay to keep possession. TheDutch second of this place went thcther to se their proceedings who possitivelyaffirms the ground they have taken is almost as big compass as the Mine Castle. 68. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 28 Jan. 1686/7 ln obedience to your Worships command for speedy advice of all occurrances , Ihave sent this cano to give your Worship account that yesterday came from theMine to Taccarado about one hundred and fifty canoes, in each cano three menwith arms, Dutch coulers flying and beating drums, to seize the French and carrythem to the Mine, but they haveing notice of it the natives conveyd them up thecuntrey and fled all from the town themselve s, so that when the Mine blackslandedtheyneitherse white nor black, being nothing leftbut their houses whichthey put fire to and burnt them all to the ground, and then they marched a little way up the cuntrey fireing shott into the bushes as they went along, with intent to drive them out, thinking they were hid there, but finding nobody there they were forced to return without accomplishing their ends, 102 but I understand by the Dutch Cheife of this place that the Generali of the Mine is resolved if possible to drive them out, for he saith if they settle there this place will be worth nothing , most of the trade comeing that way, especially now the !dooms not haveing free passage, but I here notwithstanding all their endeavours to the contrary if the French follow their business they will settle there in spight of them , for the natives are resolved to protect them and convey them away upon all occasions, arnd if taken at a surprize to stand by them to the last man. I here by the natives they expect two great ships more of great burthen to bring materialls for building , and then this ship that is allready here is to go for Arda to buy slaves to bring to Taccarado to work for building a fort, 103 whic h .is all at present but the unwellcomeness of a bad trade, for what with the disturbance of them and the difference of the upland natives it grows worse every day, for I have not taken above. of last months taken [ = taking] this month. 69. Thomas Buckne ll Succondee, 7 Feb. 1686/7 I have by the bearer hereof sent down my January account with four marks, four ounces, seaven angles and four taccoes of gold being the ballance thereof. I received your Worships letter of the 29th January mentioning what fresh goods were come over for Cabo Corso, but by reason of a bad trade have no occas ion for any here. Captain Bristow said he had an order from your Worship to put six chest of sheets ashore here, but haveing so many of the last that was sent me remayning I refused them, my trade being dull. From the time of my sending for powder to the end of the month, l took but five ounces of gold, and yet not above a week before they were mad for powder and cleared the Dutch of all theres, so that my trade is such a lottery 1 know not what to advise for, for they are eager for a sort of goods, just as I send for them , I am not certain they will vend when they come upp. The Antea people say the war lyes betwixt Wassaws and !dooms spoils trade and the cuntrey people say it is the unjust dealings of the An tea people, so that what with one and with [ms. 'wt'] the other I have small encouragement when it is like to be better. What[ = that] the upland wan hinders I know , but I am certa in the Antea make it worse for there came a man and bought five peas in goods at our factory and the town panyard it from him, which is a common trade amoung them and [they] some times sell the traders two [= too] for a slave, wlaich makes them afraid to come down. I would have gott leave of the Antea to have sent up the cuntrey with some dashes for the upland Cabushers to se if I could have made trade better or elce to have had better sattisfaction to the contrary, but they would nither consent to my goeing or sending any body and to offer it without their consent were a vaine attempt, for they would certainly doe him a mischeife. The person I have now sent down with my accompts is Hastings Ingram, who being to civilly used groweth upon my kindness and doth not behave himselfe of late as he ought to doe [ms. ' does'], he says he came of great freinds, and upon that I suppose he thinks himselfe to be to good to be under my command, his behaviour being more like a master than servant and canot show me less respect than he doth, without he should tell me playnly he is my fellow, perhaps he hath been a better man than ever I shall, yet now I think he ought to be so, so long as I am placed by your Worship as his master, so humbley desire your Worship to give him a check or elce detain him and send another man in his room which your Worship shall think fit to doe. The French came from Taccarado to take canoes here to goe to Commenda but here [= were?] stopt by the Dutch untell an answer was had from the Mine whether to Jett them go or not. Here bath passed by a Pourtugues to the Mine whose Captain was seized by the Dutch at Axim. 104 Pray send a baile of narrow nicconees per return of the cano, a chance customer haveing bought most of that is made remayning in my accompts. 70. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 10 Feb. 1686/7 Your Worships ofyesterdayes date is received with my account inciosed returnd to be signed, the oversight of which I am forced to confess to be a gross error, two [=too] plainly shewing my negligence in not takeing more heed in seing all things properly placed, but I hope for this once your Worship wil1 be gratiously pleased to extend your clemency to a pardon which I humbly beg, promising more care for the future. I have now by this cano sent them down signed. I have also sent the graplin and tarpaylin. The bail ofnicconees is received, being the worst I have had since my being here. Thirty of them are verry much damnifi,ed, some the worm hath eaten halfe through, the doubles I can run my fist through and some the edges eaten, and those that are sound are verry course, which happend just upon the riseing of them, I fear wi11 cause a stop to their vent. I here no news of Mr Bayly nor any other ship except a Barbarian[ = Barbadian] interloper to windward which is the same sloop Mr Wood was fitted out to take last Aprill, 105 but hath nothing now but rum and a slave cargo. Pray send word how much William Woodmansey must have per month, your Worships last letter concerning it menti.oning his full pay and he sayeth he hath left eighty pounds a year in England, allso pray send word when Charles Deans pay is to begin and whether Samuell Jones is to have anything advanced above his ordinary pay for looking after the arms. 71. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 20 Feb. 1686/7 These are to advise your Worship that Captain Draper is arrived in this road , who humbly presents his servis to your Worship and desires your Worship would be pleased to pardon him that he hatl1 not as yett sent down his boate, which he saith he will send as soon as with conveniency he possible can. 106 He hath had but very bad tradeing to windward, scarce any canos comrning aboard except at Bassam. 107 He mett with Mr Bayly who is not yett gott so high as Cape Appalonia. Captain Draper humbly desires your Worship to send him word whether there be any com to be had to leward. Here hath lately passed by three Pourtugues, one from Lisbon haveing only a slave cargo aboard, the other two had tobacco, both which were panyard at Axim, and sent to the Mine directly. This I did not advise of before thinking not worth the charge of a cano. Haveing no more but the unwellcome news of bad trading to advise your Worship of, only Daniell Coopman after I had write my letter hearing I would send a cano to Cabo Corso desired to goe down in the cano, which the Captain being willing to I consented, by whome your Worship will receive the Company pacquett. 72. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 2 March 1686/7 Your Worships of the 28th of February I have received, being an order for purchaseing com, for effecting of which I will use my utmost endeavour. Here is abundance of com at the crooms, if I can perswade them to bring iit down. I will call the Cabusheers together this day and here what they say, and tomorrow I shall send my monthly accounts and then I will render your Worship advice what may be done in it. I have a very bad trade here; I have not taken a bendy of gold this fortnight and better, neither hath here bin any traders down, and I cannot understand what causes it to be so bad. They have no upland wars as I can here of, only threaten it dayly, which hath bin a long time doing. The cheifest reason as I can gather is the unjust dealings of the Antea people towards them, which causes them to forsake this place, and seek trading otherways, as I am told by some of the town people themselves which used to keep correspondence with the traders. 73. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 4 March 1686/7 I have sent down my February accounts inclosed herein, with mk2 6oz 1 a 6ta of go ld, being the ballance thereof. I had sent them down that day I write to your Worship off; but seing Mr Baylys sloope I staid the cano to know if he had any business with your Worship, 108 and the next day happened a strong east wind, all day long, that the cano could not go of, which detaind her tell now. My trade is very bad, I have sold nothing but sheets and narrow nicconees this month and of those a verry few, most of the latter we sold to one customer all at a time; I have not taken the vallue of a taccoe for above a week past. I have spoaken with the Cabusheers about com, and they give me very fair promises of procureing the quantity your Worship writes for. I know there is enough at the crooms, if they will but bring it as they promise they will. They have brought about fifty chests already, most of it from Taccaradoe. There accompany this cano John Dean, carpenter, who came over passenger in Captain Draper for Cabo Corso. I desired him to come ashore to fix a door and other conveniencys for the com room and set up cabi ns for the white men to lye upon, which were necessaryes I much wanted, so hope your Worship will pardon him for staying and me for detaining him so long affter the rest of the passengers. Here inclosed comes an attestation of the damaged nicconees signed by my selfe and men; I could find no number on the bail. 74. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 14 March [ 1686/7] This accompanys Samuel Chambers, who bawling the sain [= seine] 109 this day, was accidentially stung w ith a fish, which hath swelled his hand very much, and fearing further danger might insue he is now come down to have some timely remidy of the Doctor. I have noe trade yett for gold, and I hav e but four chests of corn come in since my last advice to (your Worship), but I suppose wett weather that we have had hinders that. I hear the Generali of the Mine will be here with in three or four dayes. 75. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 20 March [16)86/7 I have received your Worships letter of the 15th instant by Mr Peperell, 110 and according to the contents thereof have obeyed your Worships order in ladeing aboard what I had by me, which is seaventy chests good sound com free from wevills, but dust there is a little, which I cannot avoid, otherwise the com is very good. I shall continue purchaseing untill an order to the contrary from your Worship . Here is com enough, but they bring it but slowly in. I will use my endeavour for purchaseing a bigger quantity as soon as possible, which when I have effected, I will render advice. I have likewise put aboard the sloope the scaffolding poles and ladders, which came up heither for the building, to be put ashore at Commenda , being write for by Mr Chambers. I have little or no trade here yett, so have not occas ion for any goods. The General! of the Mine hath write to the Dutch Cheife of this place that he will be here this week. If so he comes I shall to my power show him that civillity and respect that is due to his quallity. 76. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 24 March 1686/7 I received your Worships letter of the 23 d instant by way of Comenda, being order for allowance of three taccoes upon each chest of corn for the spedier purcbaseing a quantity thereof, for efecting ofwbich a <iilligent and faithfull endeavour in me shall not be wanting, but as yett I have received but little since delivery of the last, the natives being busy about planting new com (so] that they will not bring in the old. Haveing no trade so no occasion for any goods, I have nothing more to add. 77. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 6 April 1687 I have now sent down my March accounts with seaven ounces nine angles one taccoe of gold, being the ballance thereof, which your Worship will receive per the bearer hereof. I have noe trade yett nor se no likelyhood of itt's being better. If there be any of the fine sort of narrow niccones I had before the last bale was sent me, I desire your Worship will be pleased to send me a bale per return of the cano, for those I have, if it where not for buying com I could not vend them. Also if there be any sheets or blew perpettuanoes I could take some mony for them. As for com, I have yett but thirty chests more of, which hath been brought within this two dayes . I have many fair promises of a quantity considerable, but use what endeavour I can they will not b1ing it in no faster. Pray send some iron bans, for I have but few left, most of which are refused by the Blacks. 78. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 14 April 1687 I have received your worships of the 11 instant by Mr Pepperill, with two hundred iron ban-s, and te1m whole ffirkins of tallow. I have likewise received per retturne of the four hand canoe, two bailes containing 50 blew perpettuanoes. As for other goods, I have noe occasion for any att present. And for ships to windward, I hear of only one small Portugueze which is about Ashenee, 1 11 and of one great Deanes[= Danes] ship which is now in thjs roade. As soone as I hcare of any Englishshippe I shall not faille to advice your worship thereof. 79. Thomas Bucknell Succonde, 15 April 1687 This goes by the canoe your worship sent to Cape Tress Pointas, and is only toadvise your worship that John Shoticr is verry ill of a gripping in the gutts and aviolent loscness. He himself desires your worship will be pleased to order theDocter to send rum some trunge that might give him ease, he being now in muchpaine. I have received the blew perpettuanoes and also the iron and tallow by theAlligator Sloope, which was dispatch from hence yesterday. 80. Thomas Bucknell Succonde, 18 April 1687 This accompanies John Shorter, who being verry bad of the flux and haveingnothinge here to give him ease, and findeing himselfe to growe worse and worseevery day, was verry desiarous to goe downe to Caboe Corsoe to seek for remidyof the Docter , soe have sent him per this canoe. Haveing noe occasion for goods,nor noe news of any shipps. 81. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 2 May J687 These are to advise your worship that I am in want of these ffolowing goods, vizt blew perpettuanoes, sheets, narrow tapseiles, narrow nicconces and halfe barrellsof powder, of all which I humbly desire your worship to suply mee with allconvenient speed, for I have had sometrung of a trade this two or three dayes,wruch hath almost cleared mee of those goods, and more money lies ready in thetowne for the same comodities. Narrow nicconecs I have a small quantity left, butthere being soe many damaged in the last baile, with those I had before leaves meebutt little choice of good ones. I am now to advise your worship thatt the hoopes are moste of them flowne offfrom the whole barrills of powder; and the rest arc soe brittle I am afraid to removethem, Jeaste the[y] fall in peices. Per the rettume of the canoe with goods I shallsend downe my Aprill accompt. Heareing noc news of any ships to windward,have nothing more to add. 82. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 5 May 1687 Your worships of the 3d instante is received, with one hundred and twenty narrow nicconees, one hundred and twenty narrow tapseiles and twenty halfe b,mels of powder. I have here inclosed my accompt for Aprill, and by the bearer hereof have sent downe the ballance, being seaven markes, six ounces, one angle and seaven taccoes of gold. As for come I have aboute 92 chests, butt according to your worships order I shall nott buy any more untill further advice As soone as I heare of any English ship, I shall not faile to render your worship speedy advice thereof. 83. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 12 May 1687 To understand that this evening came downe from windward a ship under Dutch colours, which the Blackes thinking to be a Duch interloper, went on board to buy brandy, butt the canoe were no sooner along bis side butt he lett downe a tackle and ho[o]ked upon the canoe and hoys[t]ed itt aboarde with the men in her and fyred att the rest. 112 What country be is I know nott, for since he anchored he hath putt outt boath English and French colours, which makes hee suspect him to be a pyratte. To our sight he appeares butt a small ship, butt how well he may be fitted for a ill designe I know nott, butt giving cause of suspittion by those ill circumstance I thought itt convenient to render advise thereof to your worship, and likewise to Captain Gould, to whome I have writte concerning him to be delivered him by the way, leaste he should be surprized by them in the night. I received your worships letter by Captain Goulds boatte, butt bis ship being gone downe for Commenda before receipte thereof I have not received any goods from aboard him. Present my humble service to your worship, humbly begging your worship to excuse brevity, being some tbinge in haste least the ship should sayle before my letters went. 84. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 23 May 1687 To understand that I am in want of these fflollowing goods, vizt two hundred iron barrs, two bailes of blew perpettuanoes, six chests sheets, twenty halfe ffirkins tallow, one barren of home hafte knives, tenn pieces of course sletias and tenn pieces of green plaines and tenn pieces boysadoes, all which if a supply been at Caboe Corsoe I humbly desire your worship will be pleased to send with all convenient speed. Haveing no news of any ship I have nothing more at present. 85. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 29 May 1687 I received your Worships of the 261h instant with two course sletias, twelve green plains and twelve boysadoes, whereof one piece of plain and four pieces of boysadoes is damnified . 86. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 29 May 1687 Please you to understand that I have received per the nine hand canoe your letter with the following goods, vizt six chests of sheetes, one bale of blew perpetuanoes and tenn half ffirkins of tallow on the Royall Companyes accompt , for which goods according to your order I have here inclosed a receipt. 87. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 19 June 1687 I have sent this canoe on purpose to render advice that last night came to this place a Dutch canoe from Axim with the Chief of Axims boy in it going to the Mine with a letter, who gave accompt to the black that used to bring accompt s down to Cabo Corso that at Ashinee was twelve sail ofFfrcnch shipps, and that two of them has beetcn a Dutch interloper down to Axim and have shott his sailes all to peeces , and that be was going with that letter to give the Generali of the Mina notice ofit , upon which newes I went presently to the Dutch Chief at this place to know whether he had any such newes, who denyed that he heard of any thing of it, but his boyes standing by made answer there was such newes from Axim and avouched it strongly to his face, which he seemed angry at, and asked him[ = them] why they told not him before, they answer' d they thought he had a ready heard of it, which makes me conjecture he bad already heard of it but was not willing to own ii, but my boy tells me he see the Chief of Axims boy and that he told him he was carrying a letter to the Mina with that newes, upon which grounds although I have nothing of certainty I thought convenient to render an account thereof. Mr Pepperell still rides here, it raining so perpetually day after day that wee cannott gett the com aboard, and having no more but an old four hand canoe wh ich will carry but 8 chests of at a time makes it so tedious. l hired small canoes , but they wett it so much I was forced to leave them off. As soon as weather pennitts I shall use all possible means to dispatch him. He hath already on board one hundred and sixty chests and I beleeve there is fourty more ashore, it shall be laden on board with all expedition. Here is more com to be sold, but not at 2a per chest , for canoes comes from all parts both windward and leeward, from Axim to Anamaboe ,113 hither to buy com and give any rate for't , here comes at least 20 canoes every day, but if wee raise a price I belecve would gett com good quantity, for if they can have the same price ofus as of blacks I should have it for the sake ofmy liquors, which I am forced to expend freely among them to gett what I have since I come up last. 88. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 21 June 1687 I received your letter per the return of the canoes, and shall duly observe the contents thereof and will not be negligent on any accompt. As for goods I have not occasion for any, having taken little or no mony this month, the waters being so high with the continua l! rains, that traders cannot come down. I have received from aboard the AUegator Sloop two hundred iron bars, and have laden on board said sloop two hundred chests com, all I had, but shall be endeavoring to puchase more to the quantity of one hundred chests as per order. These with my humble service is what offers at present, only my corn I measured by an ordinary sheet chest, I have no other, if any be wanting I shall make it good. 89. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 10 July 1687 Per the bearer hereofl have sent down my Junes account with seven ounces eleven angles and six taccoes of gold, being the ballance thereof. 1would have sent them sooner but that it hath rained here so continually the canoemen would not go, which hath likewise been the occasion of my bad trade this month , the waters being so high traders cannot passe. These ten dayes of July 1have not taken the value of eight angles of gold, no traders coming down by reason of the ffloods. Pray send me when conveniency permitts six chests ofsheetes, twenty halfffirkins of tallow and one bale of narrow tapseeles, and six empty halfbarrells to put the damaged powder in, all which thought good to advise for to save the charge of a canoe on purpose, for when weather permitts traders to come down what I have of those goods would be soon disposed of. I have bought forty five chests of corn more, which is all can be gott here, for what is left is half nought and good for litt le. Pray send me word whether the men here are to be paid their wages at four pound per ounce next pay day or whether they are to be paid at the rate they had formerly to the 51h of June. 114 [PS] Captain Thomas Tours now rideth in this road having been two months . 90. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 11 July 1687 I received your letter, with twenty half ffirkins of tallow and one hundred and twenty narrow tapseeles on the Royall Companys account. Per the return of the canoe I have sent down twenty five chests of come, good measure. Would have sent thirty, but the canoe leaking so much water I could by no means perswade Hucamee ' 15 to take it in. I pray advise me how the soldiers ought to be paid here. This week is the dancing time of the Blacks , at which time a custome is due to the blackes Cappusheers of this place from the Royall Company, which if your orders contradict not I shall pay them. PS. Likewise six empty an.kors are specified .in your letter, but none came in the canoe. 91. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 16 July 1687 Yours came to hand late last night, and according to order have dispatched the canoe this morning early with twenty chests of corn and shall not be wanting in my endeavour to purchase more. As for news I hear none at present , when any offers I shall not be negligent in rendering advice thereof. Here inclosed comes another Junes accompt signed. 92. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 18 July 1687 Having an opportunity by my boyes going down about his own business, I have sent these to desire you if there be any silk longees at Cabo Corso of a deep redd and yellow coulored chesquers, to send me thirty or forty of them, they being very much enquir' dafter. Likewise if any sheetes pray send three or four chests. Have nothing of newes as yett, only a Dutch ship taking a Portugueze to windward, which I suppose you have heard of before , I not knowing it myself before they past this place. Pray if businesse you liesure send me word what order I must use in paying the soldiers, their two months being up and they demand their mony. 93. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 20 July 1687 Your Jetter is received with one hundred and thirty sheetes, tenn cases of spiritts, tenn flowered silk longees, and twenty silk ditto, all on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Per return of the canoe have sent twelve chests of com, all I had and all I can procure , the old com being all gone. As to promotion of trade, I have used and ever shall use my utmost endeavours to procure it. I must confesse my returns are but small, but hath never been occasioned through my negligence, for I have alwayes made it my businesse (as it is my duty so to do) to promote trade , and have given all imaginable encouragemen ts to the natives to be conformable thereto; but if the event answer not my expectation, I know not how to remedy it. I could wish I had a trade to give you content , for it would redound as much to my creditt as to the Royall Companyes interest, and I should be much to blame if I did not seek it. You write you only expect my endeavours , which I faithfully promise to use, so pray judge me by it, and if you find I am remisse in any thing which might be to the Royall Companyes interest, deal by me accordingly , but if the successe of my pains answer not expectation, when my endeavour is used , in that point I am excus;lble. I have received six empty ankors for powder. When any thing of note presents to windward I shall not fail to advise 94. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 1 Aug. 1687 Yours I have received , with one hundred and four narrow nicconees and twelve peeces of green plaines on accompt of the Roya ll Affrican Company of England. The canoe came late this morning, and you ordering her speedy return have dispatch[ ed) her early this evening , but have no com to send in her. I had sent my accompts but could not gett them all written in so short a time, but shall send them speedily after. Having nothing of newes to windward as yett. 95. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 5 Aug. 1687 Per this canoe have sent down my July's accompt with the ballance thereof, being three markes of gold. The Jacob Pink ancho red here on Wednesday night and designed to say le next morning , on which accompt I forbare sending a canoe with advice, thinking they would have been there allmost as soone, but weather not permitting they tarried longer. I have no other news at present. The Blacks report there is a Portugueze at Cape Tres Pointas, but whether it be true I am not certain. 96. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 11 Aug . 1687 These are to desire you to send mee one hundred iron barrs and twenty balfe firkins of tallow. Pray send them as soone possible may be, the tallow being all sould , and traders waiteing for more. According to your order I have consulted Captain Assume about procuring two 11 hands and I fifteen hand canoes , and he tell' s mee he knows not where they may be had except at Axim, and there by no meanes to be procured with out the leave of the Duch cheife there; bee makes itt bis proffitt to take money for all canoes sould there, and paying the blackes in goods, otherwise he will not lett a canoe goe off; and if they gett ittoffwithoutt his knowledge, if ever bee heares off itt, hee makes them pay for itt what he pleases himselfe; soe if you please to have them through bis meanes, Captain Assume sayes bee will send to some Cabusheers of his fri[ e ]nds there , to see they be good; as for himselfe, understands butt little of a canoe , nor none of bis servants. Alsoe the messenger sent with my accompts will goe up to see for good, and knows an Axim, that usually byes them for the Mina people, who he sayes will gett them if they are to be had; and they say the Chiefe of Axim will lett any man make his own bargaine with the Blackes for the canoes, or if required will further you in it; all he desiares is to have what you bargaine for in money and he to pay them in goods. Soe if you thinke :fitt I will send up to see if they are to be had; and if to be had when bargained for; I will gett the Duch Che i fe here to writte to him at Ax im, to lett such canoes come off and pay him the money for them. Soe if you like off itt, advise. As for come here is noe old to be had, butt ifnew will serve, I believe such a quantity as you writte for may be procured. Have noe news of shiping. A Sunday noone last a small Portuguez anchored here , and weighed att night, he said he wou ld goe for Caboe Corso. He infon11es mee he saw noe sbipps butt a Fleming interloper upon the Coaste. 97. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 15 Aug. 1687 The 11 hand canoe arrived here on Saturday at two in the afternoon , by which I received one hundred iron barrs, five whole and ten halfe firkins of tallow , all on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Sunday I kept the canoe , not having come ready, but have dispatcht her this morning early with fifteen chests good come. If you have occasion for a considerable quantity of come , pray advise per next and shall endeavour to procure it. Here is new come in abw1dance at the crooms, but must be bought with caution for they bold it up at 2a 6ta per chest, imagining wee are in need of it as formerly. I have received your letter by the two hand canoe, the contents of which shall observe with diligence. This day shall send to Axim my servant, and Captain Ashume likewise [will send ] to bis friends , and as they shall report whatt canoes are to be had, shall render advise; the Dutch chief here is so sociable and friendly a neighbour , that doubt not but to have his assistance. Having no news of shipping to windward have not else to add. 98. Thomas Buckne ll Succondee, 30 Aug. 1687 These are to advise you that I sent my servant to Axim to leame what canoes were there to be bad, and gotta letter from the Dutch Chief here to the Copeman 116 of Axim, of wb_ich I bad an answer from him yesterday by the retume of my servant, in which be writes me he hath one very good eleaven hand canoe to dispose off hirnselfe , which is all the canoe [s] are there att present, but he sayes he will gett mee in a very little time a ffifteen hand or what canoe soever you please to write for. My servant tells mee the eleaven hand canoe is a very good new canoe, it was bought out of the country that day be arrived there. The length that he brought mee the measure is full forty nine foot, the breadth four foot. There is a knott in here [= her], just under the stearesmans seat above the watter, otherwise as they informe there is noe ffault in her to be seen. The price he writes me is four bendys, and for a fifteen hand six bendys, besides sending canoe men to fetch them. This is the answer I bad, which when you have considered off pray send me word whether you will have itt or noe, and whether I shall writte him to proceed for a ffifteen hand canoe, and as you please to order shall send word to Axim. Some small time since two of the white men were taken sick, by wh ich we were disabled to keep watch as formerly. This the Negroes perceiving, made use of the opertunity one night to climb up the hill next the baie and breake open the shutter of the warehouse window, and although the iron barrs stopt them from getting in, yett they made shift by fastaning ffish hookes to stickes and alsoe to lines with a bullett of lead, to heave them into the natTOW tapseiles, and by that meanes drew forth eleaven ounces in goods; this I found out by two hookes they had fastened to a great nicconee which bad more weight upon it then there tooles bad strength to remove, broake the hookes in itt, which I seeing made the goods be told, and found eleaven ounces wanting, the chief of which is natTow tapseiles. Th is lose (not knowing the transgressor) I consealed but keept strickt watch, expecting there second comeing, in which they failed me not, for nine dayes since Samuell Jones sees two men at the window, whome be watched till they had itt open, then ffetcbing a musquett , shott one of them through a loopebole in the fflancker with a brace of bullets, which went in att his side, and out att his backe; by this he was taken, and confessed his fellow, and this ffellow impeached six more of the towns people, upon which I sent for the Cabusheers and told them my losses, with the transgressors , and witball if they would not secure those persons that were impeached, they should pay for the goods, upon which they went presently and seized them, and finding one bendy four angles in goods in their houses, I can by no meanes perswade them to deliver the men into my possession, but they proffer to give the bendy four angles in goods again and sufficient pawns for four bendys twelve angles more, which l would not conclude upon, before I gave you advise thereof. Soe (Gentellmen) if you thincke fitt to lett the buisiness to be made up on them termes, or if you have any thing to say further in the matter , pray advise.Three dayes agoe passed by a small Portuguez to the Mina and another is att Axim, noe other ships as I beare offyett upon the Coast. Pray send me twelve peieces ofboysadoes, and twenty peces of green plains , with a caske of rum. Alsoe pray order some iron shackles, I have four paire charged to me, which are sent downe with slaves, and not returned. 99. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 2 Sept. 1687 By the canoe I have received twenty peices of green plains, one caske containing sixty five gallons rum, and six paire of short irons 117 on the Royall Companyes accompt. Would have sent my accompts, but being a little buissie could not gett them writen . Mr Chambers being sicke, I wanted his assistance. The goods found in the Blackes houses have received, the pawnes shall gett as soone as possible, and shall be the more urgent Captain Assume being very ii I, and thinke he will dye, which if soe this will be a distracted place for a time. As to slaves here comes but few, what may be had, I will be sure to buy. Heare ofnoe English shipps as yett, when I doe shall not faile to advise. The Pourtuguez I wrott was at Axim, is as I am told taken by the Dutch, and sent to the Mina. Thomas Mekin and Henry Eves came with the canoe. William Woodmansey and Nicholas Rudy are the persons that were sick, the former is well againe, the latter on the mend ing hand. Both unwilling to I.eave this place, soe keep them still. 100. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, l O Sept. 1687 This is to acquaint you that Hukamee has been up att Axim and disliked the 11 hand canoe and has bought a 7 hand one, which he saies was your order to him to take any canoe he liked off there, for which the cheife of Axim writes to mee to pay the Cheife here two bendys for the said canoe. I being verry bad with the fflux, not capab le of writing, I could not send my accompts, but you shall have them as soon as possible I can. I have sent per Huckamee six markes of gold, which is near the ballance. The Cabusheers will give noe pawns till Captain Asshumee was well, for the breaking the warehouse, only brought part of the goods, and now Captain Asshume is dead, and there is nothing more don in the palavara, and he is buried in the Dutch Castle, 118 and I understand that the Generali of the Mina will be here on Sunday next to putt in another. 119 101. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, I 4 Sept. l 687 Yours by Mr Elwes 120 is received with two anchors brandy one Turky carpett, and one sheet. Mr Elwes hath insisted on the pallavera he came for, to whom l refen.you for satisfaction for what is don, myselfe by reason of sickness not being at the pallavera. The particulars of the goods stole is forty seaven tapseils na1Tow, and eleaven narrow nicconees. Mr Blinsham returns by the same conveyance be came. My selfe through Gods blessing being able to walke about though very faint, but hope in three or four dayes shall gather streng(t]b to go through my buisiness as well as ever, and then shall send my accompts and have all things in good posnrre. The canoe shall pay for as is ordered. I sent not a canoe [to infom1] of the Mary's being to windward, hearing Captain Bradley had sent himself. 121 102. Thomas Bucknell Succondee , 19 Sept. 1687 These serves particularly to give you accompt that have received from on board the Mary ten chests sheets and two bales blew perpetuanoes on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Mr Boylston 122 hath made the pallavera for restitution of the goods stolen, and do expect immeruate satisfaction. 103. Thomas Bucknell Succondee, 19 Sept. 1687 These are to give you accompt thatt the Cabusheers came about sunn setting, and brought five ounces twe lve angles in gold, seting the rest of the money upon the heads of those in hold, 123 art six pease per man, which they wou ld have mee take, and Cabusheir Clois 124 sett free. After much pallavara I toke the mony, butt not as sattisfaction , telling them this that I cou ld not end the pallavara without your order and that I would writ to you there offers, and before I received an answer from you, I could sattisfie them no further on such tennes, which they desired mee to doe. Pray in your answer a word bow you would have me acte in their pallavaras . These with my service to your selfe and best respects to Agent Bradley. 125 104. Thomas Buckne ll Succondee, 26 Sept. 1687 By this canoe have sent down the two men who sto le the goods, also doe by this give you accompt that Herny Eves dyed yesterday in the aftemoone, but hath left nothing behind him worth taking note off. A Ffriday morning last the Mina Generali came hither, and stayed till Sunday morning. He made Jitle or no pallavera with the Cabusheers as I can hear off, only he gave every one of them a green perpetuano for a dashee and likewise to all the Cabusheers of the croomes; he sent for the Cabush iers ofTaggeradoe to come hither to him, with whom be had a great pallavera, about the ground the Brandenburgh inhabits, which he hath new bought of the Cabusheirs, and paid them four bendyes for it here, with this proviso, [that] they should tum out the Brandenburghs , which they have promised him to doe. 126 He is now gon up to Axim. 127 The Generali likes our fort much , but disliked his owne [PS] Pray send me one bale of narrow nicconees. 105. Samuell Chambers Succondee Factory, 2 Oct. 1687 I am verry sorry that I must acquai11t you of the death of Mr Bucknell who dyed in a swooning ffitt suddenly. Pray excuse my short writing , for I was very much troubled and danted at such a sudding (= sudden] thing. 106. Robert Elwes & William Cross 128 Succondee, 6 Oct. 1687 According to your order we have inventoryed the Royall Affrican Companys wharehous , and have taken an exact account of what remayns were there, one of which inclosed wee send down to you togather with his last monthly accompt we could find, and compare ing that with the remayn[s] wee find him indebted to the warehouse above seaven marke of gold, without he has sent money downe to you, which by his papers wee can not find, being left in soe disperst a manner and not any book of accompts to be seen. We alsoe send you herewith an accompt of his estate, which wee have taken with all care and caution imaginable, and shall secure the same till further orders. I desire I may be ordered if you please to [stay?] in the ffactory, understanding Agent Bradley' s departure will be suddenly and my September accompts not finished . Mr Cross being much ffrightened desires the same. 107. James Walker Succondee, 10 Oct. 1687 This accompanys Mr William Cross, and are to infom1e you that this morning at four [I] arrived att the Royall Affrican Company of Englands factory. Might have been there soner, but tllat the canoe men would put in at Comenda, under pretence that the wind blew bard , when it was noe such thinge . Presently after my arrivall, wee went about inventorying the warehouse, which inventory have in closed . Hope shall be more successful! than my predecessors. Shall allways have due regard and respects to your commands and instructions, and am humbly thankful! for your favor to me, and shall behave my self soe that noe dishonour shall come to you for your great kindness. Pray send me on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England, tenn barrells of powder, one caske of rum and annes for the soldiers, tenn will be sufficient, which shall be keept as ought to be. Wee have discoursed the Cabusheirs, who are well sattisfied, they have made a demand of custome, whjch have promised shall be allowed off as fom1erly, soe pray advise what itt is, as may goveme my self there by. Request that I may have the sheep, and some other things which shall have need of, which did belong to Mr Buckne ll, and shall pay the value on demand. Have not any thing at present that can trunke off, butt shall be diligent and careful! in the trust now reposed in me. PS. Pray send one barrell of tarr and nailes, locks and hinges. [PPS] Since my conclusion here is arived in the roade a Dutch sloop, and has brought from the Dutch Castle four or five men, and four great gunns. Thiere intent I know not, but leave to your judgement. I shall certain ly be soe carefull that they shall have as little advantage as possible. Here is noe more than five men besides Mr Chambers and two of them are very i 11, soe desire you would be pleased to send me what you thinke convenient. As to the fllag itt's soe tome that it's a shame to hoyst it, the length of it is twenty four foot, the brea[ d]th sixteen, humbly desire may have a new one sent me as soon as a canoe shall come , likewise some bobins for the fflagg, match, carthridge paper, fflints for musquetts, spunges and ladles, for great gunns. 108. James Walker Succondee , 15 Oct. I 687 On sight of yours, I toke Samuell Chambers alone and examined rum, which way he imagined the Companys concerns should fall soe considerable short as now they did, and that he haveing the key of the warehouse in the sickness of Mr Thomas Bucknell, he must certainly know of the thing, which he says he is inocent off, and that Mr Bucknell was a man lived very high and was very liberall as to house affaires. I presently serched his chest and elce belonging to him [and] find noe more gold than five peoz which have inclosed. Have examined all men, which says nothing went out of the Castle after the decease of Mr Thomas Bucknell , and that the warehouse <lore was sealed the next morning after he dyed, and continued soe till Mr Cross and Mr Elwes opened it. Shall give you due answer as to yours per the 11 hand canoe tomorrow. 109. James Walker Succondee, 16 Oct. 1687 Your two bearing date the 14th instant have received by the 11 hand canoe, with fforty nine gallons of rum, six barrells of powder, six English musquetts and six swords, all new, with four paire of hooks and hinges, all on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company ofEngland, on whose accompt pray send mee one hundred and ffifty iron barrs , these have here being much rust eaten , which prevent there say le. Alsoe pray send twelve good boysadoes or more, if can spare them, these two comod.ityes being askt for. The Blacks here demand ofme one angle upon a bendy, as being formerly allowed by Mr Whiting, and Mr Bucknell. On my denial! they made a pallavera that noe money should be brought into the Castle, soe was forced to submitt. Pray advise if must continue it. Beleive will be a hard and difficult matter to breake them of that old and soe good custom to themselves. I received three men per name as you nominated, and now shall keep a centinall day and night, and shall be soe circumspect in all actions, that the Dutchs shall find itt a hard matter to gaine any oppertunity of injuring any thing, belonging to the Royall Affrican Company of England here. The second of the Dutch came two days since to visitt me, who [I] made welcome, but could not gett any thing from him touching affairs, wee soe ill understanding one another. He told me Mr Bucknell was there debtor for powder twelve angles, which he desired might be payed. As soon perused yours tooke Samuell Chambers by himself and demanded of him the key of his chest, which sought all over very carefully but found not there any money or papers of accompts between Mr Buckne ll and rum.I lookt into every place in the chamber but to noe purpose, finding nothing. I required of him what had about him, he produced five peoz and one discharge from under Mr Bucknells hand for the month August. Haveing don with him cal led up the soldiers one after another and exam ined them, who doe protest that they see not any thing carryed out of the castle after Mr Bucknell was deceased , but that the next morning Samuell Chambers sealed up the wharehouse dore and soe it remayned till Mr Elwes and Mr Cross come to inventory the Royall Companys concerns. As to my getting out of the Blacks anything, if it were certaine there were any such thing , tis impossib le, he[= Chambers] speaking Blacks 129 soe well that he can oblidge them as he will per way of there country. I have really don my utmost in order to your comands and wish could have given you more answerable account. I have sent per this canoe two roles [= rolls} of tobacco and his chest, which is all he has in the Castile. I have ]aide wait for news of shipping to windward and am promised shall have intelligence if any comes to Axim, and that which is really true. The man have imployed is the chiefest Cabushiere in these parts, and as soone as receive shall advise presently. Pray Lett me have a bill of prizes of goods, and your answers as to the Cabushiers custom , which they thinke long till payed. Alsoe pray send me on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England, three yards of redd broad cloath. I have nothing of moment only begg pardon for the ill writing, which is because I am destitute of a penkniffe. 110. Ralph Hassell 130 & James Walker Succondee, 24 Oct. 1687 First wee must begg pardon for not haveing acquainted you sooner, but as yett have not don any thing. Yesterday morning wee arrived about seaven a clocke, and at landing was meet with a great concorse of people, which did not make any opisition, but were frindly giveing us acky: 131 soe past up to the ffort quiettly, then sent for the Cabushers, who came. l put the question to them what injury did Mr Walker ever doe them that they should in soe inhuman a manner abuse him , wh ich was not only the injury don to his person, for which they must make sattisfact ion, butt the great affront and abuse to the English nation, which was matter of consiquence. They made noe answer butt said they would come today at l O a clocke. Wee expected them accordingly but they came not not till just now (twelve a clocke), and putt us off till tomorrow, today being the last for mourning for Captain Ashume, all the country round about being there to lament him, and as soone as have concluded or [we] heare what they [say], and what sattisfaction or agreement they will come to, shall not faile to rende r advise. Noe news of shipping to windward. PS. We have this day taken an inventory of the warehouse. 111. James Walker Succondee, 27 Oct. 1687 This accompanies Mr Hassell and six marks, six ounces of good gold, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Will send you my accompts in three or four days. Mr Hassell has made an end with the Cabushires, who does say what was don was not by them , but by the younge men of the towne, 132 who I had not paid theire custome, which now I have, they giveing sattisfaction for the [a]buse, two sheep to you, one to me, and payment for my cloatbs, and a pawne which they say is a Cabushers son, that I shall not have any abuse offered or anything that is ill. Reffer you to Mr Hassell, whoe will informe you more at large. Pray send me on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England, thirty or fourty halfe ffirkins of tallow, or what you can spare, with the goods advised you ofin myne of the 16th instant, alsoe stores for the Castles use. Request may have as soon as possible. We heare of a great Ffrench pyrate who has on board her three hundred men, and is to windward of Axim. 133 Shec has taken a Brandersburgh, and has engaged ThomasTowers and killed him many men, and don great damage to his shipp. As soone asheare of any English shipp, shall advise the needful I. 112. Theophilu s Blinsham Succondee, 5 Nov. 1687 This accompanyes Mr Thomas Johnson, who brings you the invent ory of all theRoyall Affrican Companys merchandizes, ammunition , stores belonging to thesaid Company, remayning in the Fort. Yesterday I received the possession thereofaccording to youJ' order of primo ditto , by the hand of Mr Johnson.In which conccme I hope to discharge my self of all things committed to mycare, and to give you good sattisfact ion of my dilligence, therein, and for yourfavor I humbly thanke At my arrivall on the :first instant between 5 and 6 in the morning , I found MrWalker laid forth, who dyed the evening before, about 5 in the afftem oon. Idemanded his keys, and all things belong ing to the deceased. They who watchedhim tould mee the wharehouse and his chest was sea led up per his order, and all things was there inclosed. His corps was enterred about one in the affternoon,neare to his predecessor, I havcing the company of the Copeman and second of the Dutch Castle at his funeral!, I beseeching God lo give me good success, to enjoyeand survive my predecessor. By the inventory you will plainely see what goods and materialls are wantingin this ffortt, seeing the remayns are soc much damnificd. Bee pleased to send onaccompt of the Royall Affrican Company 5 or 6 chests of sheets, l 00 or 200 ironbarrs, 3 or 4 boysadoes, a caske of the best sortt of knives, allsoe accompt of theprizes of all goods as now sold, and if can be spared a carpenter, with some plank,nailes and small trucks for the gunns, as alsoe lo make up2 or 3 cabins for soldiers. I find a chest of suggar in the ffactory, supposing it to be the deceasd's, whichby my desire is left here, baveing occasion for itt, and [having] noe stilliards,134 have computed it at large to be 120 lb and shall be accomptable to you for thesame. Likewise of the deceased's , a Black boy about 7 yeares old, being now sick,and by the consent of Mr Johnson have detained him, when well shall beaccomptab le to you, what he may be reasonable worth. There is alsoe of sheep tenn in number , 5 yews [= ewes] and 5 lambs, one being old and sick, to which 1begg your consents, to Jett mee have them, what they may be reasonable, worthshall be accomptable to you for them. If soldiers can be spared pray send two orthree, seing here is one mansick. [PS] I desire to waite on you with my first months accounts and if possible to seale my Binin account 135 or when you shall please to order me. 113. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 11 Nov. 1687 My last to you was per Mr Thomas Johnson, with the inventory of all the Royall Affrican Company concerns here remayning in their fort of Succondee. Also I desire certaine goods from Caba Corso , which if not sent before this comes , to your hands , I pray add, thirty na1T0W tapseeles , and half ffirkins tallow , what you thinke fitt. I do expect little trade this month , seeing the Adooms are fallen out amongst themselves. As I have accompt , shall give accompt of their proceedings. I hope I may Jive quietly with those people here. As yet I have nothing to say against them, but they ask me often, ifl am to revenge the qua rrell of Mr Walk er , which I tell them I have not any thing to do in. The Cabushi ers have demanded their dashees , I desired them to tarry untill I have heard from Cabo Corso. As for any thing else I referr to my former. Just at the sealing of the letter , there is a shipp appears just off ofTackerada. What she is know not. PS. One of the clock aftemoone 114. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 11 Nov. 1687 This day about 12 a clock came into this roade Captain Emanuel! Burgess , who intended for Cabo Corso, who brings a note from the Mary, the contents are as as fo lloweth , vizt Thomas James , IO November 1687 If you be an Englishman, that these lines shall come to, I am now the King of Englands shipp , and have this day been engaged with a pyrate and his prize , both of them having about 36 gunns , and for want of a wind and cunant setting into the bay, I am now to Jeward of them , therefore if you be an Englishman desire your assistance, and tomonow will certainly take them both, and in so doing, you will oblidge your King, and the Royall Affrican Company and your servant, now comander of the Mary. 136 Wee have been engaged this day about 8 houres. I understand but one Eng lishman hurt. This day about 12I heard many guns, as it seemed to be broad sides, although no place mentioned in the letter, what bay [he] Speakes off, but I understand byblacks, they are near to the Brandcnburgh Fort. J15. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 15 Nov. 1687 Yours of the 12th ditto I have received, as also a letter to Captain James, which Ihave sent, he being then at Comenda. According to your order, have acquaintedthe Cabushiers concerning their dashees, and of their barbarous usage to MrWalker, to which they give title answer, only hums and haws, of which I cannotunderstand, but [they] tell me they love me very well, and desire I may tarry with them and they will do very well by me. I have made what inquiry I can, asconcerning the !dooms warr, which is as I am informed , there being four or fivecoming to towne this day and give accompt that it is quite over, it being only twogreat Cabusheirs, the one taking away the others wife, and concerd 137 her, somepallavera having been, for 4 or 5 days past, and further tells me that severallIdooms will be downe very suddenly. As for any shipps, to windward, I hear ofnone, only the pyrate lyeth still at the Brandenburgh fort. It seems the DutchCopeman had the pyrate ashore at Axim and treated him well, for which he is dismist,138 and the Copeman of this place is this night going thither Chief. By this canoe comes two white man, Joseph Boyce and John Cunnington, the one beingsick, and the other understanding the Coast frigga!t is sudden ly to be paid off, andhe having debts owing him, and be owing to me, desire to be there at the time ofpayment and then to returne , as also Boyes[ = Boyce] whe n well.I begg your ffavors in sending the prizes of the Royall Company merchan.dizes as now sold, being unwilJing to damnifie the Company or hurt my selfe,which at present am i[gJnorant off the goods remayning. [PS] If men can be spared pray send a man or two. 116. Theophilus Blin sham Succondee, 16 Nov. 1687 This aftemoone about 5 of the clock came to an anchor in the roade ofTackerada ,the pyrate and his prize, and sent his boat, intending to go ashore, but the Blackssent off to the boate a two hand canoe, to tell them they should not come there fromthe pyrate. 139 They[= the pirates] said they would come and bring great guns, anddestroy them, if they would not yield tonight or tomorrow,My endevors shall not be wanting in securing the Royall Company ffort,having water for 20 days, and the Cabushiers will hinder their coming ashore here, as they have promised. The Blacks this day tell me there is a great shipp at Dickiscove , being darke could not see his colours. Also say the pyrate had seaven men killd by the Mary, and were buried in the Brandenburgh ffort, for which he saith he will have satisfaction. How many wounded know not. What is further needfull, be pleased to advise. 117. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee , 19 Nov. 1687 Yours per Mr Price l have received, and have per this canoe sent two carbines, one pair of pistolls, one birding peece, one silver hilted sword, and a Black boy, being Mr Walkers. Hoping to be at Cabo Corso on Munday next. The pyrate and prize went to leward yesterday , supposing to Comenda, as the Blacks say, to setle a factory there .140 Succonde, 18De c. 1687118. Theophilus Blinsham Yours of the 12th ditto I have received and the merchandizcs therein exprest out of the Ann sloope, Mr Richard Bradshaw Master, and are as ffolloweth, six chests of sheets containing three hundred and ninety, one hundred and fifty iron barrs, fifty tapseiles, fifty halfe firkins with tallow , and fifty one gallons rum, all on account of the Royall African Company of England. According to your order, have put on board the same sloope all the damnified powder that was remaining in the fort , being in all eight and a balfe barrells of damnified powder. I shall doe all I can to make the best and quickest returne of the merc handizes . I heare since I came up of some canoes that are to be sold at windward, five, seven, nine and eleaven hands, which with your order shall endeavor to buy, rangoes being there good, the deepest redd are the best. The charges from hence is four angles for a two hand canoe and kanky mony 141 for the time of their stay. The Black that goes belongs [to) the Fort, and hath been there in the time of Mr Thomas Bucknel l. 119. Theoph ilus Blinsham Succonde, 20 Dec. 1687 My last was on the l 8th ditto, since none from you. This day the Cabushiers of this townc was with me for there dashes for a new Cheife, 142 in which pallaver I ffollowed your order of the 12th November, to which they would not give me answere, but said they would stop the traders from coming to the Castle to trade ifl did not pay the dashes. I feare the next thing will be in hindring the Royall Companys slaves in fetching of wood and water or shutting up the gates. At my arrivall here I found Mr Thomas Price and two more very ill disposed in body , with greatc paines in the head, and burning fcavors and womitings. Desire those thingsmay sent that are nece ssary for those distemper s, as l have writt the doctor.! desireone caske of beefe and a caske of bread, these two that are here are neer out, andshall send the produce with the ballaoce of my monthly account , and for wood andwater shall gett into the Fort what I can. If you will be p leased to allow the dashethey will be satisfied, if not be pleased to send some Cabush ier to discourse them,for I have noe one here that I can trust. 120. Theophilus Blinsham Succond e, 30 Dec. 1687 My last was the 20th ditto, since none from you, in whichl gave you account of theBlacks palaver about their dashee for a new chcife , and also that without theywould stopp the trade of this place, which next day they did, and have had noetrade since. I doe beleive and alsoe are informed , if they can gett me they will sendme to Cabo Corsoe Castle. 121. Theophilus Blinsham Succonde , 3 Jan. 1687/8 Yours of the primo instant have received and, have sent for the Cabusbiers , some of which are a rowsawiog , and will be in towne tomorrow , being sent for, andthose that are here will not doe anything untill they come altogather. Shall doe all Ican to end the palaver. The indisposition of Mr Price hath hind red me of sendingmy monthly accounts with ballance and inventory of the warehouse , hopeing thatin a day or two he will waite on you, and give you ajust account how all things arehere. l heare this morning that Captain Batherne is at A.xim. 122. Theophilus Blinsham Succondec , 4 Jan. 1687/8 This accompanyes Mr Thoma s Price, who according to your order brings you mymonthly accounts with the ballance, which is one markc, two angles and ninetaccoes of good gold, as also the true inventory of all the Royall Companyes goodsremaining in their Forte of Succondee. This afternoone l gott together the Cabushiers, but they would not come intothe Fort. I told them it was to pay them their customes as you had ordered for a new cheife. I could not perswade them, but what I had to say I must speake to a Blackand the black to tell them, which I did, that you were willing to give them for adashce of a new cheife , one green perpetuano and one anchor of brandy, seing theyhad custom e for a new cheife ,143 1could not perswade them soe lately, they mightvery well take it, and that I was ready to give it them. The Cabushiers sent me word they had been soe often for their customes that I had made them ashamed, and that they would have me goe to Cabo Corsoe and not to stay here, which is all I can gett at present from them. If you are pleased to allow the blacks to chuse the Royall Companys servants, and to send them of at their pleasure, they will have one every two or three months, which will be very hard for any to live without better reasons or objections then they, as the blacks tells me. If you will be pleased to send a Cabushier to discourse them, that the truth may be knowne wherein J have [ not?] done any thing, but always endeavored to oblige all the Cabushiers of this towne, as much as possible I could, and have endeavored to encourage trade with them as much as any man, and they never come to the factory, and goe away but they have drams. Haviing not arty one that I can trust to tell them anything, wherein I can be sure they tell the same I speake to them, doe beleive they tell me one thing and the Cabushiers another, which you will be pleased to send a Cabushier, and their customes, and that their may be a right understanding between us, I beleive all things wil I doe well and the Cabushiers satisfied a greate deale better then now they seeme to be, by reason of a bad interpreter between us. Hopeing this thing will be taken into your considera.tion, being the reall truth. 123. Theophilus Bliusham Succonde, 13 Jan. 1687/8 This accompanyes Captain Quow, 144 who I hope will give you a just account of the pallaver with the Cabushiers and traders of this plac e, though it was ended the evening before , by Captain Batherne and my selfe, which hope is to your likeing to pay the blew perpetuanoe, two narrow niccanees , one ankor of brandy and one anchor of rum, for their customes of a new Cheife, and have free trade, and all things elce to be the same as formerly before this palaver begun , on the payment of the aforesaid goods , which next day was done. I would have given you accompt before this but Captain Quow hindred me by his arrival! next morning with your orders, and being desirous to give you the greatest satisfaction I can desire that Captain Quow might here the pallaver and the agreement between the Cabushiers and me, which was made the night before, which was granted, and find nothing in itt but there dashees being not paid as formerly had been done , that now they are all goods [sic) ffriends, and will doe all they can to encourage trade to this Fort, and the Cabushiers frowes you all ackey. The green perpetuanoes being all damaged , paid Captain Batherne 9a for one blew perpetuanoe, which shall charge in my monthly account , and also the two ankors of brandy per Captain Quow, which are already expended , one to the Cabushiers and the other in the time of the pallaver. Shall endeavor to redeeme the time that has been lost and encourage traders, hopeing my two accompts for November and December are right. Desire thereceipts for the ballance , and also a noate of those mens wages that came to melast. A day or two past the Dutch slaves and the French had some skirmishes attTaccaradoe, wherein some was wounded. How many kill' d know not, but in thenight aboard the French ships was fired 6 or 8 guns, supposeing some officer wasburied ,145 and at Quidah 146 the Dutch and Brandenburg bas 2 or 3 skinnishes , butof what effect know not. 147 124. Thomas Price Succonde, 17Jan. 1687/8 I arrived here about seaven this morning, where 1 found all at quietness. Iunderstand the pallaver was made up before Captain Quow came up, with thehelp of Captain Batheme, who will be able to give you a true and exact account ofall their proceedings. Since the business has been made up, Mr Blinsham hathtaken but eight angles for iron barrs, they carry their mony aboard shipp. CaptainBatherne is now at ankor between Shumah and Succonde, 148 and endeavors totume it up higher and higher. 125. Theophilus Blinsham Succonde , 17 Jan. 1687/8 Yours of the 16th instant per Mr Thomas Price I have received, and find that youwill not allow of the dashees paid to the Cabushiers and traders, which was oneblew perpetuanoe, one anchor of brandy to the Cabushiers, two narrow tapseiles,one anchor of rum lo the traders for their customes, and to end all pallavers, andmake a free trade to this Fort, and one anchor of brandy expended in the pallavers.Doe beleive had their dashees been paid at ffirst without any trouble as MrWalkers was, [they] would have taken as they did of him, one green pcrpetuanoeand one anchor of brandy to the Cabushiers, one broad tapseile and several! case[s]bottles of rum, but how it was charged to the Royall Company know not. I hopemay be allowed the same as my predecessor was, if not the same that is paid, Idesire you to allow what you thinke fitt. I hope Captain Batheme when comes toCabo Corsoe will give you a good reason for the payment of those goods, who seing the narrow watching of the Blacks for me, and doc beleive if could havegotten me as they did Walker, they would have served me the same, and also toother things, as the Blacks pretended to in the hindrance of rowsauing , their were damnified. Hope ing all things will be considered, and not thinke too much paid on the agreement with those unruly people. 126. Theoph ilus Blinsham Succondee, 20 Jan. 1687 /8 Having an oppertunity by a two hand canoe bound to leeward, would desire you to send up some powder and lead barrs 149 for the use of the Royall African Company of England, the said goods be .likely to be in request at this place, by reason of the warrs breaking out between the Adoomes and the Warshaws.15Captain Batherne came to an anchor in this roade yesterday, he hath noe greate matter of trade, but presents his most humble service to you . Referring you to my former, hopeing you will consider me as other men. 127. Theophi lus Blinsham Succonde, [blank] Jan. 1687/8 My last to you was the 20 th ditto per a leeward canoe, desiring powder and lead barrs, to which be pleased to ad some sheets on accompt of the Royall African Company of England, having disposed of most of those sheets that were remaining here by reason Capta in Batheme had none left, but takes what mony comes for other goods. Hopeing in a little time may have a trade at this place , if warrs continue. 128. Theophilus Blinsham Succonde, 25 Jan. 1687 /8 Yours of the 23dditto per the eleven hand [canoe] have rece ived and also l 00 lead barrs, three hundred and ninety sheets, ten whole barrells of powder, all on account of the Royall Afr ican Company of England , and shall be sure to retume you the Companys gold where the goods are disposed. As to the customes which I have paid to the Cabush iers, is very little more than what Mr James Walker gave before me. Whethe r its on the Companys account or his owne I am not certa ine. Here are them that delivered it, and see the goods paid. I desire to know what you will allow , and for the rest I will doe as well as I can , and the Royall Companys honor and intrest shall be wholy seekt for by [TB] 129. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 3 Feb. 1687/8 Th is accompanies my monthly accounts with the ballance , being six ounces, six angles and foure taccooes, which you will receive per bearer. I have not charged any of the Cabushicrs dashes lo this months account, having not your orders. TradeI have had none this 8 or IOdayes, noe people from the upland country. Expect toheare of the Adoomes and Wasshawes second fight very suddenly. 151 CaptainBathernc sayled ou.tof this road the 31st of January 1687/8. 130. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 20 Feb. 1687/8 Yours of the ditto I have received , in which you blame me for not giving youadvice of Mr Thomas Prices going from hence per my last, which I could not do,he being then on board Captain Batheme, and came here in a day or two after, andthen told me Mr Robert Elwes had rece ived a letter from you, for him to go toComenda. I have always endeavou red to oblidge the blacks of this place, and dobeleive that should any aske them of my kindness to them, they would speak wellof me, or elce I am sure they abuse me much. I am sorry the ballance of mymonthly accounts are not greater, I wish it were in me to enlarge them, but at thistime it lyes in many, that in litle time I hope will amount to the largeness of yourdesire. It is now very small, yet larger than my neighbour, 152 for three months lastpast for goods sold 5mk 4oz OaOtaand all charges to be deducted. I am informed oftwo or three English shipps al windward, one at Dickiscove as I understand byblacks a pink. I canno t hear but by blacks and oftentimes they tell lyes to gett adram. l wish I could be more punctual in my writing of things at windward. Sometime you may heare of sbipps at windward before me, by some vessell as goes tothe Mina, which passeth here at great distance. Captain Buttram came into theroade ofTackeradoe on the 9th instant, and two or three days after came to an ankor off of Abody. 153 Five or six shipps have past here to the Mina this month fromHolland , whereof three for slaves. It shall be always my care and indeavours tomaintain the Royall Company honour and interest, to the utmost of my power. 131. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 3 March I 687/8 My last to you was the 20th February, since none from you. This accompanyes myFebruary accompts, which ballance comes per bearer, being in all one marke, oneounce, one angle, lenn taccoes and a damboy , which finding write[= right] praysend a receipt for this and January accompt, haveing as yet none. I shou ld havesent this month accompts two or three days sooner, being ill disposed desire your pardon. I have endeavored as much as possible I can to enlarge but as yeti cannot,the [A]doomes and Warshaws being now for two or three days past fighting, as Iam infonned. Some Cabushiers desire the Adoomes to come in to this towne to reside here till the warrs are over. Its expected the Adoomes will be beaten. What goods wi 11 be wanting here I know not, there being so smal I a trade at present, only nicconees being in request. I understand Captain Buttram intends a trade at Cabo Corso Castle on Munday next. 132. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 12 March 1687/ 8 This morning arrived here Captain Lomax boat with the Royall Companyes letters, and desires they may be sent forward to Cabo Corso Castle. He being a stranger himself to this Coast, cannot spare his boat and men. The ship is now at Dickiscove at present, finding but litle trade, intends to be here in two or three days, Captain Barrett aJTived here on Friday. Wee have a generall conformation [= confirmation] by all Blacks here, of the totall route of the Adoomes by the Warshaws , who having taken all the countrey but two little small towns, which are said to be taken yesterday. This morning a messenger is sent by the Warshaws to the Cabushiers of this towne to have a pallavera with them . Hoping in few days to have encouragement of a better trade than for some time bath been. 133. William Ronan 154 Succondee, 12 March 1687 /8 On my arrivall here I have according to your orders, and directions , proceeded in inventorying this factory, and made an end next day following. No mony to be had this voyage, Mr Blinsham being in advance for the Company, the accompt of which have by me. The rest of his accompts are not as yet made up. Mr Price parted for Axim a Saturday night. Here is some prospect of a trade, the waJTs being over. 155 If John Downs sends the accompt of the bread, and beefe supplyed Mr Blinsham, I will returne the produce. This accompanyes the packett , came by Captain Lomax, who complains very much of meeting no trade to windward. He has some letters for Captain Buttram, but judging bis departure, did not send them. Mr Price on his returne will bring them. Captain Barrott is just now departed, he could procure no come here. Excuse scarcity of paper. 134. Theophilus Blinsbam Succondee , 16 March 1687 /8 This night about 6 a clocke I received the incJosed seaven letters from on board Captain Lomax, who as yet is at Dickescove. 156 I heare of noe more shipps to windward. Per your next be pleased to advise , if I shall take the charges of canoe byre of Captain Lomax, or place to the Companyes accompt. I hope by this, Mr Ronan and Mr Price have given you an accompt of all things here, since which islitle don, only this day came to this fort Yankey and Ashreney, with 4 or 5Warshaw people, to make a pallavera with the Cabushiers of this towne, and as lam informed they meet at Yankey's croom on Sunday next. At the time of theirstay, I made them welcome and showed the Warshaws severall goods, and toldthem they should be kindly dealt with, for what they wanted. At present here is nocome to be had, it being at the croomes, and there slaves are going, and some gonto panyar the Adoomes, I have per this canoe sent you one man slave, on accomptof the Royall Affr ican Compa ny of England , desire there may be short irons sentper the retume of this canoe. The Generali of the Mina has sent to the Copemanhere, to give a bendy a head for men slaves, and seaven peaz for women, in anysorts of goods. I can say nothing to goods as yet, having not taken one cracra 157 since the inventorying of the warehouse. As things shall offer shall give you anaccompt. 135. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 21 March 1687/8 Yours of the 19th ditto [received], with a letter to the Copeman of Axim, which issent forwards. On Sunday last arrived here Captain Lomax in his boat, who beingdissa tisfied with the blacks at Dickis cove about the delivery of com bought, andalso to understan d how trade went here, wherein I could give no encouragement,and desires me to let the linguister, that belongs to this place, go to Dickiscove,with him, to have a better understanding between them, who went from hence last night, about twelve a clock. Tunderstand that the Adoomes got togather in a smallparty , and did much damag e to some of the Warshaw peop le, the Addoomes beingdisperst in the woods. The Warshaws have invited this townes people to take ofthem what they can, (so) that wee have now very few people in the towne and atpresent here is no trade for slaves or money. As yet l cannot add to the moneys thatwas taken when Mr Ronan and Mr Price were here, only one man slave, which you shall receive with my March accompts and what elcc shall purchase to the end ofthis month. Io your next be pleased to order, if shall draw this month s accomptfrom the primo March, or from the 10th ditto. I shall do what J can to get in come,but at present there is k:nowne [= none) to he had. I shall do what I can to satisfie theballaoce of my former accompts, and shall obey your order in sending it with theaccompt, but what I had, and what I have taken, was [paid] to the soldiers, beingnow out of pockett about 5oz of gold, for the Royall Compa ny, and at present havehardly any to buy provitions. According to your order I asked Captain Lomax forthe charges of canoe byre, that is two canoes to Cabo Corsoe and one toDickiscove, being in all 8a on his accompt, which money he refused to pay ,only the first canoe to Cabo Corso Castle, and tells me he will discourse it with you. By this canoe you will receive one Samuell James, a soldier, for some time residing in this place and for some time since my coming here has been very refractory in this ffortt, by his behaviour and language, and yesterday being the 20th ditto abused me very much with a great many curses and oaths, and also threatned mine and others lives that were then in the Fort. To execute his intent got a large cutlas in the night at sentinel! with him, on the topp of the house, and said, who ever came there, he would curt him in peeces or shoot him , at which time, being not his watch, I understanding this, demanded his armes, which he refused, but by force of soldiers disarmed him and for myne and others security , put him in irons, he being still desperate, and fearing he would do mischief to some of the soldiers that lay in the room where he was, I put him into the slaves prizon, and also (he] said he would bring blacks, and beate us all out of the Castle, also said that I had put him in irons as a slave but could not sell him, but bid me have a care he did not sell me, and all the rest, he having severall times before had great conferences with blacks, and in the midle of the night in another mans watch, sets open the doores of the Fort , with a great many other bad circumstances , which I have here omitted , thinking it will be tedious to repeate , beleiving this may be suffficient. 136. Theophilus Blinsham (Succondee ), 158 22 March 1687 /8 My last was the 21th ditto, since none from you. The last night arrived the Black I sent to Dickiscove with Captain Lomax , who tells me there is come enough to come 2 or 3 shipps more, but Captain Lomax being a near and fretfull man, and not giving blacks drams, and not oblidging , (they] began to fall back from their words and [he] sending the King a dashe and none to the Cabush iers, but now tis all well, and he may have his come if he pleases. The last night also came into this towne severall Warshaw people , some wounded by the Adoomes and came here for shelter , and tis said by some blacks that the Adoomes have gotten what before had lost. Those th.at came here of Warshaw people have made [omission) to the Cabushiers of this towne, but what is don in the pallavera is not knowne, being by them kept very private. 137. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 26 March 1688 My last was the zzthditto, since none from you, The last night I received the inclosed from Axim. 159 On the 23th ditto an-ived Captain Bridges, who lyes in the roade of Abodey . As to what I said in my last concerning the Adoomes gaining the pa1ts of their countrey they had lost, it is true. I understand that a great many people are going out of this countrey to help the Warshaws. 'fhe Generali of the Mina hath sent to their Fort here two great guns, six foot long, and carryes a large 4 lb ball, and also per next do expect from the Mina 8 or ten men more. I understand that Abond Cabushier of the Mina 160 doth threaten these people in much about the 11 bendyes they owe him, what he will do, if they carry their money and slaves any where but to the Dutch, so at present they carry what they have for feare of him. 138. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 2 April 1688 Yours of the 30th past by Mr Jefferyes 161 have received and! shall follow your orders. This accompanys my March accompts with one good man slave, also one ditto sent the 16 March, for which be pleased to order a receipt. What moneys have taken thjs month, as per accompt appears, will not defray the soldiers and Forts charges this month by 5oz 3a 2ta, here being no trade at present for either moneys or slaves. On Friday last Captain Lomax went to leward. Captain Bridges remaynes here, I doubt with litle or any trade . Here is litle talk of the warrs , expecting to hear in 10 or 15 days. Captain John Lomax hath not payed me the canoe hyre , as I have payed for him, which be pleased to stopp and is as under. Also be pleased to send per bearer some large paper for accompts and some small for letters, having none left of either sort.  Captain Lomax debtor for canoe byre  oz  a  ta  To two hand canoes to Cabo Corso Castle  0  6  4  To a two hand canoe to Dickiscove  0  l  8  0  8  0  To Captain Buttrram for ditto  0  3  2  0  11  2  By moneys sent per bearer which is in full of the  )  difference of December , January & Febmary accompts)  2  5! 2  13  712  139. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee , 8 April 1688 This accompanies the bearer Mr Charles Towgood , who being sick of a feavour and ague, desires to be at Cabo Corso till better. Since the two sloops 162 came into the bay of this place , hath been very bad seas, insoemuch that they had much adoe to ride it out, the like of seas hath not been knowne here this great many years, but now all quiett. Since the carpenters have been here, have don litle , by reason of the bad weather, have employed them in doing some small jobbs in the Fort, and desire there may be 5 iron barrs made 2 foot and 5 inches long, one end to go into the wood, the other to nay le, the rest of the windows in the Fort being all iron barrs but this is not, as I formerly gave you accompt. Also here being two of those gunns that are here quite dismounted, by which are unserviceable , the carriages being rotten, understanding there is two carriages aboard the Alligator sloop that will fitt those gunns, which if you please to order, shall put the two gunns in those carriages . Also shall want ax ell trees and trucks for the other three gunns , being ail rotten and tome, also three bolts for ditto of 12, 13, 17 inches longe, .bolts. 140. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee , 19 April 1688 This accompanies Mr James Bay ly in the Adventure sloop, in which I have putt on board, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England, three good men slaves, which I hope will come safe and well to Cabo Corso Castle. I have don what I can, with those people I have of the Companyes , for the speedy dispatch of the two sloopes, but the weather has much hindred. Trade here is none, for any sorts of goods. Have not moneys to defray charges this month, and pay day is neare at hand , desire three angles and two taccoes of gold, which moneys I payed the last month, to defray the charges of the Royall Companyes Fort. The people of this countrey are going to fight the Adoomes , since are already gon. I heare not of any shipps belonging to the Royall Company at windward. 141. Theophilus Blinsham Succondee, 20 Apr il 1688 I have per Mr Leonard Jefferyes sent you one good man slave on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England , [and have received from him] one ca1Tiage for one of the gunns of this Fort, for which I have given him a receipt, also the four pair of short irons, as formerly you writt. The Dutch panyarrs all the Comenda men as comes here to this place. 163 What elce referr to my last per Mr Bayly. As to moneys can gett none, shall do all I can to make it up in good slaves, or what elce offers. Pray per the next oppertunity, be pleased to send some small and and large paper, for accompts. 142. Theophilus Blinsharn Succondee, 27 April 1688 Yours of the 25th ditto per Mr Ronan have received , and shall with all civility treathim to content, and give you thanks , 164 also one Setjant and two soldiers, who withthe rest shall be carefully looked after. r have per this 9 hand canoe sent three musquetts, which are out of order and unserviceable, desire they may be changed,also be pleased to add one musquett more to those scot, that each man may havearmes, and if can be spared, five collars of bandileers, and some odd ones, to fillthese collars here. In my last of the J91h per Mr Bayly I sent three good men slaves,which I heare not off, though I hope you have well received them. I doubt thisfactory will not defray charges this month, seing have taken no more than 1oz ofgold, and pay day being on Friday next, shall be more out. I should not have beenso earnest, but am to borrow moneys to buy provitions, which is here scarce. I have ever endeavoured to my utmost to gaine a good trade here, and would gladlyimbrace it, but hitherto am put by ofmy desire. On the 251h ditto the under Fiscallwas here at the Dutch Fort, and said the Generall 165 intended to take the Adoomes part, if the Warshaws and this countrey did not suddenly make an end of the warr,and send Abonnidoo 166 with his army to fight the Warshaws. 167Since the fight atGreat Comenda, these countrey people stand much in feare of the Dutch. 143. Will iam Ronan Succondee, 27 April 1688 I have not as yet any subject deserving your perusall, only to advise you of myan-ivall here, and for the promise of kindness you were pleased to give me, I doreturne you infinite thanks, assuring you that my utmost care and indeavour shallno way be wanting in the Companyes buisness, and shall be ever freely disposed tooblidge you on all occasions. As for occurrences for the present, do referr you toMr Blinsham. 