III KOMENDA The RAC factory at Komenda ('Comenda' , 'Commenda'), east ofSekondi, had been re-established, after earlier short -lived occupations, in October 1683 .1 It was then apparently occupied continuously down to April 1688, when it was again abandoned, in the face of a local war. 2 During 1686-8 it was being fortified, but this had not been fully effected by the time of its withdrawal. Komenda was situated within the kingdom ofEguafo ('Aguaffo'), whose king resided at 'Great Komenda', a few miles inland from the coastal trading centre. 3 The Komenda factory was mainly important for the gold trade, although it also supplied com for the provisioning of slave ships, and there are a few al Ius ions during 1686-8 to the supply of slaves. In 1681-3, the principal local trader with whom the English dealt had been one 'Captain Bracon'; but by 1686 be had been replaced in this role by John Cabess, who was indeed to remain a prominent trader.chief of Komenda down to his death in 1722.4 In addition, the Eng lish dealt at Komenda with gold-traders from the interior, the Akani ('Arcany', '.A.rcania'). 5 The Dutch West Indian Company also maintained a factory in Komenda throughout this period, which is frequently refe1Ted to in this correspondence. 6 The French Guinea Company also made attempts to establish itself in this area, both at Komenda itself and at Ampeni ('A.rnpena'), a few miles to the east. A French request to establish a factory at Komenda in March 1686 was refused by the local authorities (nos 150--2); and a factory established at Ampeni in January1687wasattacked and destroyedbyAfricanforcesfromMina alliedto the Dutch(nos 216, 221 ). A more sustained attempt to establish factories at both Komendaand Ampeni was initiated by the French expedition under Du Casse in November1687 (nos 300ft), provoking Dutch counter -measures which culminated in aninvasion of Komenda, again by Mina forces operating in the Dutch interest, inApril 1688, which forced the evacuation of both the English and the Frenchfactories there. The Mina were also allied in this attack with a dissident chief ofEguafo, called 'Tagce' (nos 313, 320). These events left Dutch influence, for themoment, paramount in Komenda, enabling them to build a fort in Komenda. 7 144. William Cross Comme nda, 24 Jan. l686 Here passed by an English ship this morning taken by two Ffrench men towindward. 8 Shee had on board the men belonging to a Dutch Companys shipwhich they have likewise taken and secured, sending the men in the afforesaid shipfor the Minc. 9 What they have done with the English men belonging to her, I cant leame; this news only I have it from the Dutch man here 10 who went on board toknow what ship it was, and found as 1 have given your [Worship] an account. Hetells me farthe r, that as soon as the two French ships now [at] Succondee comedown they have a design upon Captain Woodfine, and that the other ship here isfallen to Jcward on purpose to secure him from goeing away. She is a ship of forceand ful I of men, and what goods he bas on board are only such as he has taken fromthe Brandyburge, Dutch and English, haveing little or nothing ofFrench on board.John Cabess advised me to write to Captain Woodfines mate to weigh in the nightand goe for Caho Corso, for he has been on board, and sayes they are pyrates; but Iadvised him[= Woodfine] of the same in the morning, and as I understand by themI sent, he laughed at it, I wish he may [have] noe cause in the end. The Dutch mantells me he beleives the Generali of the Mine will write to your Worship abouteit, 11 but for fear he should not, I have sent this canoe. 1f it stands with yourconvenience, pray send me some more broad nicconees by the canoe; those yousent last are sold to four. I thought it altogether necessary to advise your Worshipof this. 145. William Cross Commendo, 5 Feb. 1685/6 I gott safe up with the goods, I thank God, and found all things in good order; but looking over the ware house and goods there I found among the caske of knives, a bill which gives an account of noe more then 145 dozen, whereas they are charged to me for 205 dozen; here is a mistake of 60 dozen of knives which, if it had not been so reasonably discovered, it might a breed a[s) great distraction as the sletias, and put your Worship to a great deale of trouble and me charge, for I suppose J must have paid for them. Herein comes a coppy of the bill; I humbly desire your Worship will be pleased to order Mr Hassell to sett this to rights in my last accounts, for I have charged 205 dozen according to invoyce I received. I am sorry it soe falls out, to give your Worship this trouble , but I hope you will excuse me in it, for it can noe way in reason be imputed to me. There is a Portugale ship at Shuma and the blacks say a Ffrench ship or two to windward. I have sent Mr Humfryes the mony for the bafts. 146. William Cross Comenda, 10 Feb. 1685/6 These with my humble servis to your Worship are to desire you to send me another caske of borne halfted knives, haveing disposed of that I had here , and because there was a mistake of sixty dozen, as I gave your 'Worship an accompt in my last, discovered first by a note found among them, which now appears likewise by tale. 12 I have sent William Bedford for your further sattisfaction, if you please to inquire into the matter; for the mistake must be when sent from the Castle, it cant be since they came here. I hope I dont displease your Worship while I give you this troble , but knowing you to be as good a[s] great, humbly presume you will excuse me, and order these thing to be sett to rights. The Ffrench sloop rides here , and another at Butterue. PS. I cant hire a canoe here to Cabo Corso under 2a and 2 taccoes canky mony. 147. William Cross Comenda, 13 Feb. 1685/6 Yours with a caske of knives containing 108 dozen of knives I have received, and had sent a bigger canoe could I have got one, there being none but two hand canoes belonging to the town, since John Cabess at Christmass last left his at Cabo Corso, it proveing soe Leakey he could not come up in it. The number of the first caske of knives is soe obscure I cant certainly tell what to make of it, but suppose it to be as per margent [= margin] ['no.540' in margin]. I have sent the head by the bearer for your Worships sattisfaction. Here is a parcell of old sheets, damnified, which will not goe off at the price with the other, but if you please to give me order I shall dispose of them the best I can; I have occasion for some liquor for the use of the ffactoty, which your Worship may send per Captain Nuna, 13 who comes as he tells me to look after one of his boyes that is mn away. 148. William Cross Comenda, 3 March 1686 These comes with my humble servis to your Worship by Captain Nuna, who brings my account and mony. I have occasion for some more sheets and horn halfted knives, and brandy for the use of the ffactory. The knives I beleive I must be forced to sett at 12 per angle, yet I have kept them up still at 10, finding them to goe pretty well till within six or eight dayes, but there are some soe eaten up with rust, they will heardly sell at all. Captain Nuna has [been] severall times at me for his wages, but knowing not how long he bas been here or upon what account I have refered him to your Worship for an order, if you design he must be paid here. 149. William Cross Commenda, 10 March 1685/6 Yours by Captain Nuna with twenty four gallons of rum and two chests containing one hundred and thirty sheets I have received and desire your Worship to send . some carpits with the rest of the goods, if you can afford them at 3a per peice, for there is a man at that rate would have layd out a bendy and a half. Here lys a French ship, takes all the trade from the shoare so that we have littill to doe at present. 150. William Cross Comendo, 17 March 1686 These lines humb ly comes to acquaint your Worship that on Fryday last the Captain of the French ship and his Liutenant went to give the king a visit at Great Comendo, takeing John Cabess with them, but since understand their business was more, for they have a design to settle either here or at Ampena and build a ffortification and went in order to gett the kings leave, which tis said by great presents they have obteyn'd, and he given them a pawn on board. I cant learn the whole, things are carri'd so private. They have been extream kind to John Cabess, presenting him high, and he a little to[ o] fforward in serving them if he considers the obligation have been lay'd upon him by the English. They have severall times sent him on shoare greate quantity of goods, more I am sure than has monyes to pay for, which makes me beleive he is to keep a ffactory for him[= them] at bis house till they retume , for they are gon to windward and design to trade about a month before they come down againe. They have left ashore at John Cabesses some water caske with [ms, 'wt'] one of their men to look affter them, the man is an Englishman, born in Comhill. 14 These are a new Company newly raised in France , 15 the fom1er and this being the two firste ships have been ffitted upon their account. I received the knives and carpitts by the An Sloop and desire your Worship to send some more sheets the next time she corhes, or otherwise if with conveniency. 151. William Cross Comenda , 18 March [ 16]86 As I writ to your Worship yesterday by Doctor Griffins 16 boy was what I understood in this affaires, but upon receipt of yours immediatly I went to John Cabess and lay'd before him, as you was pleased to order , all the inconveniences he would certainly involve himselfe in, by deserting the ffreindship hee and espec ially his father had so long been subservient to, telling him nothing would be more displeasureable to your Worship, or a greater detrement to the Royall Company than making his house a factory for the French. At this he seem'd very much concern' d, assuring me he never received any goods from the French upon any such account, very well knowing that he would lay down his life for the English, as his father bad done before him. 17 His cozen being present, sent to him from the Generall of the Mine, 18 hereing this it rais 'd a great dispute between them, in fine he bid his cozen goe tell the Generali of the Mine he would not come to him, but if your Worship was pleas'd to send for him he would most readily obey your comands, be owning himselfe a servant to none but the English. These are his pretentions, which I hope are reall, and ifl here any thing to the contrary I shall presently inform your Worship. There is none but one of there men on shoar here, which is an English man left to look after their caske. The king has given them a pawn on board, and what for I can[not] \eame. 152. William Cross Commenda, 26 March 1686 By all that I can leame and have inquired into since the reception of yours, cant find in all was objected against John Cabess, anything of realty, but that was falcely surmised , as well as informd your Worship. The French indeed went up to the king at Great Commeuda with a design to gett a settlement here or at Ampena ; but here the king would not grant it, this place being as he told them already settled by the English and Dutch. What they may doe at Ampena another year I cant leame, but beleive they will endeavour to gett a settlement their. The pawn they have on board is as John Cabess beleives for some goods they have trusted the king: he has sett his people to worke upon his canoe and as soone as done will come down and weight upon your Worship at Cape Coast, which will be in a day or two, being alwaies ready upon the first summons , as he tells me, to obey your Worships comand. The English man here on shoare belonging to the French ship has a great desire to serve your Worship either on shoare or at sea if you are pleas'd to entertain him. 153. William Cross Comenda, 30 March 1686 By William Bedford I have sent this months account and money the ba llance being 3mk 3oz 0a 6ta. Our takeings would be greater if you please to allow of cratra mony , 19 and therefore have sent down enclosed with the rest Ioz 8a for a pattern . Nuna tells me tis good mony and that they never refuse it at the Dutch factory, which makes their takens greater than ours. Here is occasion for some sheets, and blew perpetuanoes , but no cano fitting to send for them. In the caske of knives received from on board the Anne Sloop, no.508 , found wanting eleaven dozen and six knives; but the bill amoung them according to invoyces sent me specified 110 dozen, which made us tell them over againe to sure , yett affte r twice telling found them wanting. Captain Nuna desires your Worsh ip would be pleased to send him an order to receive his pay here from the time due , for he sayes all his concerns being at Cape Coast he is forced to live upon the charrity of other people here , which is very true, though he comes and eats with me, and has anything he wants when he pleases to. I dont understand what John Cabess intends to doe. When first I made known your Worships desire , he sbew ' d himselfe extreamly forward and ready, but since I have been at him every day and he puts me of from time to time soe that I cant [learn? ] where[ = whether] he designs to come or not. 154. William Cross Commenda , 2 April 1686 These are to desire your Worship to send some boysadloes and another cask of knives with the sheets and perpetuanoes I writt for by William Bedford, for yesterday I disposed of what remaynes, excepting some few which are soe eaten with rust I am afraid they will hardly goe off at all. 155. William Cross Comenda, 3 May 1686 By Nuna I have sent down my monthly account for last month and desire your Worsbjp to send more niconees broad, course sletias , and tapseiles broad, and narrow , which is what I have occasion for at present. Our knives proved extraordinary rusty in last cask, 1have disposed of some of them as you ordered but beleive ifwe had a grind stone here, might make them more vendib le. Captain Nuna desires your Worship would be pleas'd to grant him an order for his wages to be paid either here or at Cape Coast, he being in great want of itt. Yesterday noon a small .Po1tugues vessell came to an anchor at Ampena and the French sloop in trus road, both from leward. 156. William Cross Comenda, 7 May 1686 Yours with the goods per the Anne Sloop I have received and gott safe on shoar , the Captain of the French sloop assisting me with his boate, elce it had been impossible without opening the caskes , for here are not other than two hand canos, therefore if your Worship be so pleased to order, I think a three or five hand cano may be very convenient for the use of the factory and beleive I may gett one to windward. I here one of the Company ships [is] at Succondee and has been arrived there these three dayes , I am told shee is a small vessell and the Captain never here before, which is what I know at present, and understand per the Ann Sloop you have had noe news of her, [which] makes me give your Worship the trouble of these lines, desireing to be excused in my negligence of last writeing, which was occasiond [by] noth ing of moment or business presenting. 157. William Cross Comenda, 11May 1686 Nuna hearing of his house being burnt at Cape Coast desires liberty for two or three dayes, to look affter his affaires their, which occasions his coming now: by him I have now inclosed sent you one bendy, which is due to him for eight months sallery. I understand [he] is further indebted to your Worship so shall stop his pay as it becomes due till further orders. I here of an English ship to windward and suppose it may be Captain Pickard, in the Hunter, by what I understand by Captain Walkers mate. Here is little inony stining at present but the merchant tells me their will be in a ve1y short time a good trade, for gold and slaves both. 158. William Cross Commenda , 21 May 1686 I gave you the troble of a few lines by Nuna on the 11th of this instant , he desireing to goe to Cape Coast for three or four dayes, hereing his house was burnt , and by him sent your Worship one bendy as you was pleased to order me, due for his sallery here, as Iikewise as five angles, two taccoes toMr Humfryes, wanting to thebaJlance of my last months account , but haveing noe news of him since , and hepromising to return speedily, makes me humbly presume to give you this trobleagaine. I design'd to wait upon your Worship and the Gentlemen at Cape Coast,but the weather proveing very rainey and the sea growing high, I am told it is notaltogether safe corneing, but I wish you all a merry Whitesontide and that allhealth and happiness may ever be your attendance. I have heard noe news since ofthe ship I wrote you in my last was at Dickecove, soe beleive it may prove amistake. 159. William Cross Comrnenda, 25 May 1686 The enclos'd coming last night to my hands,20 [ have sent to give you notice ofCaptain Pickards arrivall , and by a canoe from JohnCabess I have endeavourd toanswer his expectation s, giveing the best inteligence I could both of the prises of goods on shoar andlon board ship. Captain Pickard sends his humble servis to yourWorship. 160. William Cross Commenda , J 3 June 1686 Herc is occasion for some more sheets, iron bars, broad nicconees and rum for theuse of the factory, which with another role of tobacco I desire your Worship will bepleased to send per first conveniency. Our trade is but small, this place seldom being without shipping , where they must dispose of their cargo at easy rates for aquick dispatch or in liing [= lying) long for higher prizes the charges of the shipwill exceed the profitt of the goods, thus I have heard them speak, yett if yourWorship is pleased to consider they hinder the factory ashore , and especily thisplace, which occasions the prizes of our goods to be lower than as I understand elcewhere, besides the merchants here, if I may call them soe, take the cuntreypeoples mony and raise their gains from them as well on shoar as on board ship,which makes them the harder with us. I have since I came up last kept the broadnicconess at 4a. For the narrow tapseiles they offer me but 3a, I allow them 3.a,buthave disposed of none. The ginghams , because the lower end is not good and beingsoyId, I sell at Sa but have disposed of no more than three since I have been here. Ibear Captain Wood is dead and buried at the Brandiburgs Castle.21 161. William Cross Comrnenda , 17 June 1686 Yours I have received with the goods according to invoyce , and sent back three cases, which are what I can conveniently spare at present. The goods came last will goe of apace, if a ship dont come and take away our trade. Here is likewise wanting some sheets, which they inquire much after. I sent Mr Bucknells 22 letter away by a two hand cano, as your Worship was pleas'd to order. The sloop23 lies a little to windward of this roade. I have no more to troble you with at present. 162. William Cross Commenda, 18 June 1686 The inclosed came last night from Mr Bucknell who desired me to send it to your Worship, being an answer to that you sent. 24 1 have had an indefferent trade since those last goods came up, and beleive they will not lie long upon hand , especially the iron barrs, if a ship dont come and spoil all. There is a flying report of ships to windward but hear nothing of certainty. 163. William Cross Commenda, 21 June 1686 I received the factory and goods here at the rate I have since charg'd them in my account. I wish your Worship and Councill had been pleas' d to set the distinct of every [in]dividiall sort of goods sooner, and I am sure I should observ 'd your order. The broad nicconees were no comodity but since when as in my last account I found them goe off, I left word upon coming down the other day to waite upon your Worship that none should be disposed of under 4a, to which price have kept them. Tis trew I never had any order for the selling them or any other goods at any set prices, and am mightily mistaken, ifl have not follow'd the same as they were charged at before I came, and hope I may be the more excusable if your Worsh ip will be pleas'd to understand that the town blacks, by takeing the cuntrey mens mony and bringing it to the factory, gett what I humbly presume you may surmise . 1 doe leave all to your Worships and Councells considerat ion. 164. William Cross Commenda, 22 June 1686 William Bedford hath been taken these three dayes with a feaver. At first it seemd little but yesterday he was dangerously ill, so that I was afraid of him , today he is a little better. I apply the best kitching physick I can, haveing no other. The role of tobacco is dispos 'd of, it was charged at 5 lb per angle containing 221 lb weight, 1 sold it at five fathom per la, the fathom containing 6 foot. I know not where [= whether] there may be a mistake in the weight or how tis, but I have not made the mony by 6a and better, this being the first, I put all the mony together by itselfe , to se how it hold out. I humbly desire if your Worship please an answer to what Iwrit per your man. 165. William Cross Comenda, 25 June 1686 l understand by a Dutch Companys srup that passed by yesterday that there are twopyrots to windward of Cape Appi lonia. He saw besides two Dutch interlopers butno English ship. I thought it my duty to give your Worship an account of this. 166. William Cross Comenda, 4 July 1686 By Captain Nuna I have sent my Junes account with the mony, and have occasionfor some boysadoes, sheets, knives, herba longees, small checkcrd, and lead bars;of the two last be pleased to send the prizes. The knives, as I wrote your Worship,prov' d extraordinary rusty. What you send now if good, will goc off apace. I gaveNuna a say when he went last for Cape Coast, for which he told me he could notbuy a good five hand canoe, which is extreamly wanting for the use of the factory,for if the goods come per the Ann Sloop, here is noe gitting them ashoar withoutone, I ther efore desire your Worship would be pleased to speak to him about it, forl suppose his man he sent may be come back againe ere trus. Next week dancingtime as they call it begins, at Great Commenda, and I have had severall invitationsfrom the king to come up. There is some custom to be paid, as a cloth to himselfand the Ffetcra 25 &c, besides brandy, all which l leave to your Worshipsconsiderat ion. I sent just now on board the Dutch interloper to inquire whatshipping were at St Thoma when he was there, who sent me word he saw noEnglish ship since he bas been gon, but left one Dutch interloper at Cape Api lona. Here are three of them in this roade. 167. William Cross Comrnenda, 6 July 1686 These are to desire your Worship to send some good sayes with the other goodssent for, if you can afford them at 14 angles. Doctor Griffin sent to me to buy oneanchor of brandy for him on board the Dutch interloper, which l have done. TheCaptain sent me the enclosed, which 1 showd to the Dutch, and find he bas mademe pay one angle more than he sells to the Blacks, the reason is as I understandfrom them that he was panyard last voyage by the English pyrate26 and is thereforeresolved to take sattisfaction of the first Companyes ship they meet with. OnSunday last they went from hence and keept all three together upon that design iftis trew as I here. I desire your Worship would be pleased to send the bearer back again as soon as possible because I shall want him. Your tobacco goes of at a little a time because it is very bad and the Dutch have that which is good, but dont question but shall ctispose of it before the month be up. Here wass [sic] the Little Phiscall of the Mine today and he would have keept this noate, ifl would have Jett him. I dont know the meaninge of it. 168. William Cross Comenda , 7 July 1686 Yours with the goods I have rece ived, but se no perpetuanoes unless it be among the nicconees, which have not open'd, haveing no conveniency of stowing them at present. I have sent herein inclosed 14a as I received it for a say, because find the mony I send down wants 6a in weight which was great weight by my scales; you cant expect that I should take the weight as at the Castle . I am forcd often to take theirupon an equall ballance, because they should not carry it away again. The 14a with one by itselfe are for fbe ballance of the errors that were in the 25 nicconees , 102 sheets and 85 dozen knives , which I desire you would be pleased to se rectified . I have sent the king word what you are pleased to allow and when I receive an answer, I shall give your Worship an account. I have sent the inclosed and desire a receipt upon it for the ballance, as likewi se for the ballance of the four last months accounts. 169. William Cross Comenda , 10 July 1686 These inclosed came from Mr Bucknell, which he desired me to send your Worship with all speed. 27 Last night fhere came down a ship with English coullers aboard and anchored to windward ofComenda hill. I sent a cano of thinking it one of the Company ships, who brought me word she was a Portuguez. This morning she weighd and stands down. I would have sent a cano againe but cant gett the blacks to goe today , they say she is a pyrate and are all afraid to goe on board her. Here lyes fhe Ann Sloop w:indbound, she has let her alone and I beleive for all this she is a Portuguez. There came no perpetuanoes with the other goods, I therefore desire you would be pleas 'd to send a blew one for the king, with what elce you have allowd, he will be sattisfied as John Cabess tels me. Here is a fair proffer of a trade, and [ need] for another man that can write, for when I have business, William Pigg not reading my noats I am afraid will make a mistake in my warehouse. John Cabess has a great mind for Benjamin Broadgate to come againe, whome I found very faith full when here before , and desire if you are pleased to send him up be pleased to send the price of the lead bars and herba longees. 170. Will iam Cross Comrnenda, 17 July 1686 Haveing this opertun ity by John Cabeses cano, these are to desire your Worship tosend some sayes, pray lett them be good and they will goe of at 14a. I have beenvery ill but thanks be to God am something better at present. 171. William Cross Commenda, 20 July 1686 Yours with the goods I have received, vizt fourty sayes, twendy [sic] five blewperpetuanoes, fourty green and red ditto, thirty five peices of narrow nicconees,and ten broad stript sattins, which I shall indeaver to dispose of to the RoyallCompanyes best advantage. I have paid the king his custom, as you were pleas'd toorder, which has well enough pleased him. Here is no news sti1Ting at present. 172. William Cross Commenda, 30 July 1686 I have nere sent per Nuna my mony and accounts, tne ballancc being 7rnk 3o 4a.Yesterday I had it well pickt and blowd28 and dont question but it is very goodgold. Here is a prospect of a trade now, and since Mr Chambers was here to serveythe ground all the people are very desireous we should have a fortificasion and willgive their assistance in what they can towards it. John Cabcss desires me to Jett youknow so much, and sayes whatsoever you are pleas'd to command he willffaithfully serve you. The sattins would have all sold if they had all been red and stript, the other sort they dont like. There is one wants about a fathom andhalfe, which has been cut off. The perpetuanoes goe of a blew and green, I keeptthem up at a blew, green and redd but could not dispose of them at that rate. Here isoccasion for some niconees broad, sattins, and as many blew perpetuanocs aswants to put of the green and redd I last received , or elce they wi II lye upon myhands. 173. William Cross Commenda, 5 Aug. 1686 These are to lett you know that I have had a good trade for three or four dayes, thecuntrey people begining to come down, and desire your Worship to send some[ omission] pound basons and their price, with those goods I sent for by Nuna, viztnicconees broad, stript sattins and some perpetuanoes, which will help of withother goods. I have likewise occasion for a blowp an if you have any to spare.29 William Pigg is taken very ill and desires to come downe, be pleasd therefore tosend another man with the goods, one that writes. 174. William Cross Cornmenda, 6 Aug. 1686 Yours with the goods I have received, and hope shall meet with a speedy saile for them as well to your Worship as the Royall Company sattisfaction, and shall observe your order in sending timely for a supply of what goods I shall have occasion for here. William Pigg is pretty well againe, he seemes not to like this place so have Jett hirne come down againe. 175. William Cross Commenda, IO Aug. 1686 Haveing intelligence of Captain Bathroms [= Buttram's] arrival about Axirn, these are to give your Worship an acccount. I had the news from a black who has been aboard a Po1iuguez vessell now at Succondee that saw him to windward. I return your Worship many thanks for the piggeons you was pleased to send me. 176. William Cross Conunenda, 1 Sept. 1686 Per Nuna I have sent down last months mony and my accounts. I should have meett with a good trade had not so many ships arriv' d, but beleive in a shorte time trading will come again and then shall advise what goods are wanting, finding no occasion at present. I bought a ve1y good man slave for seaven peas , which I sent on board Captain Brand:6.11, desireing him to bring him down to your Worship, and have here inclosed sent his receipt. 177. William Cross Commenda, 3 Sept. 1686 I had sent yesterday but a pallaver happening by turning a black out who made some disturbance in the house , was as I understand about palm wine, for I was gon to look on some com for Captain Poston , but returning present ly and finding all in an uproar and inquireing the matter found the stons and clotts [= clods] begin to fly about me, upon which I made our people secure him and sent for the Cabushers to know if they would suffer us to be thus abused , but affter a long paBaver I was contented the ffellow should beg pardon, which he did, and I thought all had been at peace and quietness again, but at night after twas a little dark thjs ffellow bring a parcell of rouges[ = rogues ] with him fireing their guns, shot and all, at us as they came along, designing some mischeifhad not they been timely prevented per the peop le here who were presently up in annes, but it being dark they could not find them . I am advised per JohnCabess and the Cabushers to send up to the king about it as well as to your Worship, for I here they design some further. 178. William Cross Commenda, 6 Sept. 1686 Yesterday I sent John Cabess and Captain Nuna to the king at Great Comenda, who acquainted him with the insolences of those ffellows, that dared abuse us; which the king was very much troubled at, protesting they shou ld be severly punished and sent away to command them before him the next morning [and] orderd John Cabess upon any such affront immediately to send him the offenders head. Tomorrow as I hear there will come one from the king heither to give your Worship further sattisffaction, this day being spent in pallavers and debates about it, understand they are all ready to give their assistance as soon as you send Doctor Griffin to treat about a ffortification. I have occasion for some nicconees broad and narrow, they goeing of againc, which I desire you would be pleased to send per first opertunity. 179. William Cross Commenda, 8 Sept. 1686 Yours per tbe nine hand cano I have received with the goods, but there falls short in the broad nicconees twenty one pieces, for upon twice telling 30 them over we found no more than seaventy nine. I began to fear as much before, seing the bail so loose, which made me open it before I took it into the warehouse, that all might be wittnesses, and because you write you have but few left and would have me dispose these the best I can, I think it convenient to keep them up at 4.a, beleiving after a little while they may go of at that rate. Ifl find not tis but disposing of them as before, they will not ly long upon hand. I have sent Captain Nuna down to look affter the sayes I gave him to buy a 3 or 5 hand cano for the use of the ffacto1y, as your Worship was pleas'd to order, which is now about 3 months agoe, and he tells me the man is not come back yett which he sent, and is willing to se affter him himselfe. The king yesterday sent me a sheep for farther sattisfaction about this pallaver, which I have sent your Worship herewith. 180. William Cross Commenda , 16 Sept. 1686 John Cabess goeing to Suma about some business is panyard their per order from the Generall of the Mine for laying out his mony on board Engl ish ships and bringing none to them. 31 He sayes he ows them nothing and humbly implores your Worships assistance that you would be pleas'd to be instrumentall as to his release by makeing some intersession for him to the Generali of the Mine, 32 which shall ever entirely devote him to the servis of the English, be resolvd to ffollow his ffathers steps as he hopes he has done heithertwo. Here is an indefferent good [trade]. 181. William Cross Commenda, 17 Sept. 1686 Have ing an indifferent good trade occasions my sending now to desire your Worship to send me some sayes, cours sletias, horn halftd knives and narrow nicconees. I have keept the broad ones ( as I write) up at 4. angles, but cant sell any at that rate so must let them goe at the former price, but it has occasiond the disposall of the narrow owns[ = ones] which did not goe off before. Here is twenty seaven narrow nicconees, three broad ditto, ffive sayes, and what knives remayn, all very much damniffied. They are as received, be therefore pleas' d to send those that are good and order how these must be disposed off. The blacks have made a great pallaver about John Cabess his being panyard by the Dutch, being resolvd to have him again or them here suffer. This has brought most of the trade to me, all the merchants and Capushers being very invetterate against them upon this account. As I was writing your Worships letter of this date came to my hands, and understand nothing farther Joh.n Cabesses business than what I write before. The Capushers and people upon their pallaver made the Dut[c]h Copeman here write to the Generali yesterday to know the reason why he panyard him; and not receiveing a satisfactory answer , and made him write againe today. As soon as we know the truth, his wiffe will send to your Worship, hopeing your Worship will be pleasd to shew some kindness to him, if tis upon account ofserveing the English. I will sent what mony I have per the great cano. I thought to have sent it by Benjamin Broadgate but I suppose the other way is more saffe. Here just now came a man from John Cabess, who sent me word that the Dutch have panyard him to make him serve them, which he sayes he will never yeild to. Benjamin Broadgate can sattisfie your Worship further. 182. William Cross Comenda, 21 Sept. 1686 l have sent down eleaven marks, four ounces of good Arcany gold,33 as soon as the month is up your Worship shall have what more I take with my accounts. The goods I received according to invoyce, and hope shall find a quick dispatch for them, and for those that are here damnified shal I endeavour to dispose of them best I can. I hear Captain Nuna is returnd and that they will not take a say I gave him toward the cano, be therefore pleas'd to order what I must give, if your Worship design to have him pay'd here and the say to be retum'd. John Cabess his wife has sent a man to give your Worship thanks for the troble you are pleas'd to take upon you in her husbands business, not questioning but he will endeavour a relation and prosequte the Royall Companyes intrest, when at liberty, to the utmost of his power. 183. William Cross Commenda, 25 Sept. 1686 Yours by Doctor Griffin I have received and understand, according to what John Cabess and Captain Nuna told me when last at Great Commenda, that the king , Fetera and Cabushers were willing we should have a ffortification here, but articles of agreement must first be propos 'd, and entred into by both parties, in order to which somebody must be sent to the king to treat with him about this affaires. Upon Doctor Griffin moveing it to the people here, they told him they were the kings subjects and servants, and whatsoever commands he should lay upon them, they will readily obey, whether in carrying stones, bricks or doeing anything elce that may forward your Worships intentions in building here; but the pallaver must be first made at Great Commenda, and when that is done, everything is comp I eat' d. 184. William Cross Commenda , 6 Oct. 1686 Finding my trade to continue these are humbly to desire your Worship to send me some sayes, iron barrs, and broad and narrow nicconees. If they can be here by tomorrow morning, which I suppose they may by sending a canoe away tonight, I dont question the disposall of most oftbem, especia lly the sayes. I to[ok] about 3 mark affter I came up yesterday, by [= but] the sayes, some of them proveing a little damnified, I was forced to Jett go at 13a; here are others that are worse, which will not fetch above I la and 12a. What barrs remayne they will not buy becaus'd not markd. 185. William Cross Commen da, 7 Oct. 1686 Yours with the goods according to invoyce I have received, and shall endeavour the disposall of them to the best advantage for the Royall Company. The barrs I find will not ly long upon band, they being markd, and for the rest, I hope a quick trade; but here came last night to an anchor in this road a Brandyburg, which may put some stop to them. 1 understand from him their is no English shipping to windward. I have sent you three mark, four ounces of gold, and according as trade presents shaU give your Worship timely notice. 186. William Cross Commenda , 14 Oct. 1686 This morning came to the ffactory the Ffetera and Kings Cbeife man , who told me all pallaver were done conseming the building and that, if your Worship pleases you may send slaves to break stone to be in a reddyness against the bricks come and build as you think most advantagious, but they admitt of no great guns. Tis to these two men the two cloths must be given, I told your Worship of when last at Cape Coast Castle. I have occasion for some more iron barrs, and if your Worship shall think it convenient, you may send them and the slaves with one trouble in the same cano. Here are remayning twenty nine sayes, all more or less darnnified, which I offer together at thirteen angles per piece but cant dispose of them so. I suppose at 12a they may goe of but I shall lett that alone till I here from your worship, which I hope will be tomorrow, or elce the people will be gon into the cuntrey, which will hinder the say le of them, for I find the trade here begins to declyn. 187. William Cross Commenda , 18 Oct. 1686 Captain Nuna desiring to leave to come down to Cape Coast about some business, by him I have sent your Worship five marks, four ounces, which wi-th the three marks, four ouncesI sentyou by John Ratlief makes nine marks of gold. I desire your worship would be pleased to send me as soon as possible two cases of good sayes and a hundred or more iron barrs, those that are marked. We here no news of any shipp ing to windward. [PS] If there are any blew broad hafts be pleas'd to send some with the above mentioned goods. 188. William Cross Commenda, 19 Oct. 1686 Yours with the goods by the 11 hand cano I have received according to invoyce, and hope they are come to a good marquett. As for those damnified sayes which are here, I endeavour the best I can for the disposall of them to the Royall Companyes advantage, and I hope to your Worships sattisfaction. 189. William Cross Commenda, 24 Oct. 1686 Yours per the 11 hand cano, with one hundred and eighty iron baITs I have received, and shall endeavour the disposall of them as you are pleas'd to direct and in every thing elce shall advance the Royall Company intrest the best I can. John Cabess presents his servis to your Worship and sayes he will wait upon you, when their bellyaring34 about the elephant they have killed is over. I am pretty well again, I thank God, and tomorrow the Doctor will come down. 190. William Cross Commenda , 27 Oct. 1686 Yours by John Ratliefe with six men, one women and a child slaves I have received, and tomorrow shall set them to work, and forward the building as fast as possible, not questioning the peoples assistance here , but there must be scarlett or blew cloth sent to the Ffetera and another to the kings Cheife man, these being the people thatt made up the pallaver with the king. 191. William Cross Commenda, 2 Nov . 1686 The slaves keep close to their business in breaking stones, the bricks being brought up with a great deale of ease by the women came last and town boyes. I have sent per the bearer one of their maul es being broken, and desire your Worship to send two double headed ones halfe as big againe as this, and four wedges more. The sloope35 will be unladed tomorrow morning, and by her I shall send down my accounts and mony , and write more at large. 192. William Cross Commenda, 3 Nov. 1686 By Mr James Bayly I have sent down last months mony and account. The iron barrs dont sell well now, especially since the price is raisd. I have occasion for some boysadoes, broad nicconees if you have any or else send narrow, carpitts, and some good sayes. Last night I received a great abuse from John Cabess for nothing al all, as Mr Bayly can sattisfie; he strick me thrice in the face and once that I fell to the ground, and after all (if he could) would have sent me away. This morning I made the pallaver, calling all the merchants and Cabushers , who all took my part, Cabess haveing nothing to say for himselfe. I told them I would have sattisfaction, which they say I shall; and left it to your worship what to impose, hopeing that if they are not soe good as their words, which I dont much question, you will have an opertunity some time or other to nabb him elcewhere. He pretends to serve the English , and doth quite contrary, but 1 made him stoop today. This morning likewise I gave the cloth, one halfe to the king and the other to the Ffetera, and a gingham to the kings cbeife man, that being what they demanded as a custom upon building, which I thought was best to give than to hinder [ms. 'kinder'] the worke. I have sent one of the roles of tobacco which I find to be rotten within side, and not vendable. This morning came here the Generali of the Mine with a great train to visitt his ffactory. 193. William Cross Comrnenda, 6 Nov. 1686 The slaves tooles being broake about their work, have sent them down to be mended; they have plyed their buisness pritty well and gott up a parcell of verry good stones. I understand since the Generali of the Mine was here be came to survey their ground and house, intending to make a fforte of itt, he was likewise to see our ground. John Cabess is very sorry and much ashamed of what he hes done , and sayes he will pay what your Worship shall be pleased to impose, and ever after will serve us soly and faithfully, hoping you will not be to severe upon him for this one time. I have since found him verry respectefull and much humbled but shante forgive him without your Worships order. 194. William Cross Commenda, IO Nov. l 686 This morning the King sent downe his man to mee to acquaint your Worshipe, thatt the cloath was sent him, is not satisfaction enough upon account of the building and would have you send up Docter Griffin and Mr Chambers to treat with him about itt, which was the answer be sent by Captain Quo who he understands since did not deliver his message right to your worship. I shall rectify the errors in laste months account and send by the firste oppertunity, butt if the tobacco must be left out in thath[sic], itt must be omitted likewise in my September account, being charged there. 195. William Cross Conunenda, 11 Nov. 1686 By the 11 hand canoe this morning I received six chests containing three hundred and ninty sheets, and one baile containing twenty five blew perpetuanoes, those I have diposed of att 1 Oa each, and the sheets will not ly long upon hand att 32 per bendy, that being the price which the Dutch sell for. If you have any more blew perpetuanoes be pleased to send some, as likewise sheets, by the sloope. I desire your Worship would be pleased to send up Mr Chambers and Docter Griffin with all convenient expedition to bear what the King further demands, and end the pallavar. The Duch are a breaking stones by us, and designe to make a fortification , they have sent up to Great Commenda, but what agreement they have made whith the King I cant tell. 196. William Cross Commenda, 13 Nov . 1686 Yours of the 12 I have received , and as for the tapseiles if they are broad they may sell, butt it is seldome any body enquires for them; here are about forty five narrow ones which lye upon hand, becaus they won't give 4a for them. The sheets goe off verry weell. 197. William Cross Com.mcnda, 16 Nov. 1686 Yours of yesterdays datte I received and hope shall soe maneged the pallavar as tobringing it within compas of your worshipe allowance, which shall be forwardedwith a convenient speed. Here is one Negroe, a Cabusheire of Great Commenda,lives here by the Kings order, to see that wee suffer noe abuises any ways byBlacks &c. I have found him experimentaly servicable aboutt John Cabessesbuisnes; and he lookes carffully affter building to see that nothing is stoic and Idont question his assistance in the foresaid affare, for all which to encourage him, I told him 1 would writte to your worshipe that he might be entred into theCompanys service att 4a per month, which if you please to grante, as I thinkeitt extreamly nessesary, I am sure he will save and geett the Company above fourebendyes per month, for not only this, butt he is a greatt trader and bringcs to the ffactory most of the money comes through his hands. The Ffettera and one or twomore interseding I have forgiven John Cabess, and he made satisfactione, soe thatwee are good friends again, he sayes he has a dasshee dow [= due] for yourWorshipe too for your worshipe (sic] upon the same account, hopeing you willlikewise be pleased to excuse him. Wbith this comes my October account, but I have not left out the tobacco,because I am debter for it in September, butt for the futter shall sende the money toJohn Downes and shall take care to dispose of the narrow tapseiles according to order. Here lyes the broad blew bafftes cam lastc, they dont goe off at 4a. If theyhad been black, 1 should have had none left by this time. 198. William Cross Commenda, 19 Nov. 1686 The Kings cash keeper hant been hear yett aboult the pal lavar, butt yesterday JohnCabess went up to Greatt Commcndee. I acquainted him with everything yourworship gave in order and he promised to gett the buisnees done for as little aspossible, and soe make up the pallavar that there shall be no more trouble. I sent aman along with him, and as soone as he rettumes shall give your worship anaccount of their proccedi ngs. 199. William Cross Comrnenda, 20 Nov. 1686 The man I sent with John Cabess is rettumed, who brings word that when DocterGriffin and Mr Chambers were att Great Commenda the Kings demands wereffifteen sayes upon accompt of the building, but they telling him that it was tomuch, affter some consultation, hee was willing to accept offfourteen, and nowbecause I have putt in my word (if may writtc in there own stille) be will taketwelve , upon which I sent a man to John Cabcss, the utmost your worship haveallowed is eight sayes and to endeavor to bring it within that compas. This is what I heare now, butt when he retturnes you shall know farther. I hear he has spoake and done verry well in the bebalfe of the English. (PS] I sent downe yesterday in the Adventure sloop a good man slave att 7 pease. 200. William Cross Commenda, 24 Nov. 1686 I have sent the four hand canoe and desire you to send as many one pound [basons] as shee can conveniently bring; or in case they ffall shortt some sheets or broad nicconnees, that shee may not retume empty; and pray Jett them be here tomorrow morning, which may be effected by sending the canoe away ton ight. John Cabess rettumed yesterday from Great Commenda and brought much the same newes that I wrott your worship before, which was that the king stood for 12 sayes, saying they were to be distrubutted amonge his Cabushers and that a small sharee would come to himselfe , which makes mee humbly waitte your worships furder order. Be pleased to send all one pound basons if you have them. 201. William Cross Commenda, 1Dec. 1686 This morning aboute nine of the clock I arrived safe at Cornmenda, where I found my old customers the Arcania merchants weighting my comeing. I have taken some of there mooy, and want for them some sheets , boysadoes and nicconees, which occasions my sending this cano now, and desire your worship would be pleased to order soe, that she may be here tomorrow morning. For what powder you are pleased to send I have agreed for a place to keep it in. I desire you to send those articles as soon as possible, with an order to pay the king the ten sayes, upon bis signing of them I shall send in my accounts and what mony more I take by the next conveniency, and desire you to send a padlock for my warehouse. 202. Will iam Cross Commenda,3Dec. 1686 By Mr Ellwes I have sent downe 3m 60 1 a 6ta in gold, which with the 15 marke I brought makes the ballance of last months accompte, being 18m 6a 1a 6ta. My accompts you shall have in a day or two, as soone as copp ied oute fair. I only waite Doctor Griffins comeing or meeting mee att Great Cornmeoda, for the sooner this buissness is compleated tis soe much the better, thearfore be pleased to order his comeing as soooe as possible. I have occation of some one pound bassons , powder, and because the nan-ow are gone send some nan-ow niccanees. [PS] I want a padlock with grurnmetts and staples for the powder roome. 203. William Cross Commenda, 4 Dec. 1686 Upon the bearers designing[ = desiring] leave to come downe to see his wife by him I have scntt the broken mawl es and wedges to be mended. Hearin likewise comes my accompte, and shalIsend another coppy by the next conveniency. I stayfor Doctor Griffins meeting mee att Great Commenda or his comcing heithcr, for Ishould have been theare before now. By MrEllwes I gave your worship an accountof what goods we are want ing. 204. William Cross Cornmenda, 5 Dec. 1686 Yours I have received with two hundred two pound pewtter bassons and tennbarrills of powder. Instead of the narrow niccanees came a bayle of paper brawles, which I shall endeavour to dispose off the best I canne, butt I never heard themenquired after. Bee pleased to send some niccanccs, more powder and one poundpewtter bassons if theare bee any, as soone as with convcniency you canne, andpray Jett the baile of narrow niccaoees be discounted that theare may bee noehcarafter mistake, or trouble. The place weare I putt the powder is the warehousein Captain Braughtons house36 where Mr Chambers formerly was, where Ilikewise putt the paper brawles, till I finde they will sell, thinking itt nottconvenie nt to retume them. I am now providing for my goeing up to the king ofAguaffo tomorrow, to end the pallaver about the house, which I hope I shall soewell conclud[ e] that ill shal I bee both for the Royall Companys and your worshipsand Coun cills satisfaction. I finde itt will bee to my noe little charge and likewisehope you in them will consider and nott to lett me beare the extreamitty of itt. MrEansworth37 and another man from the Mina are goeing just now up to the king. Idoe nott know theire buissness butt hope itt is nott to intercept any tb.inge of ours ,because bee knows I am to goe tomorrow, butt if itt is I bee leive hee will loose hislabour. Bee pleased to send the contents of the baile of paper brawles and theprices, for J have nott opened them. 205. William Cross Commenda, 7 Dec. 1686 I am just now with John Cabess and Captaine Quow returned from the King ofAgauffo, where wee have finished the pallavcr soe benneficiall to the RoyallCompanys interest, that 1 am sure your worship will be satisfied with itt, and youmay goe forward with the worke when you please and as you please. I have notttyme to acquaint you with all our proceedings now, butt you shall have the full byCaptain Quow, and only send these to prevent further charges, hearin g DoctorGriffen and Mr Chambers is to goe to the King tomorrow , which would havesignified noething, if I had nott went in the nature J did. 206. William Cross Commenda, 8 Dec. 1686 In order to your commands on Munday morning early I sett out with John Cabess and Captain Quow to end the pallaver about the house with the king of Agaffo, where we arrived by 10 of the clock and were conducted to the Mareens 38 house, presently after we had audience of the king, Fettera &ca, where affter some little entertainment we were dismist, and told we should have a hereing on the morrow morning, and were conducted to the Mareens, haveing there refreshed our selves, comes one to me to know what presents I had brought with me for the king, Ffetera and Tagee.39 Now being forwamed that my not come ing up and bringing those presents which is usuall upon such accompts had occasiond the hindrance of our building, and the pallaver could never be ended otherwise , I accordingly provided my selfe and sent each of them and their wives a present , which was verry we ll accepted. In short the morrow being come , we were sent for, where were present only the king, Fettera and Affer Tagee, with one or two more of their attendance. I ffully layd before them all your Worships demands and took their answers in writeing, where affter some debates it was ordred In primis, That we should build our house in what manner and forme we pleased and have a mudd or stone wall about it, but noe great gunns att top. Item, That the Commenda people shall fetch up the stones for the mony owing about the fformer building in Agent Greenhills time40 and that we only give them drinck; Itim, That if any of our slaves make their escape be shall use the utmost of his power for the regaining them Itim, That none of the Commenda Cabusheers shall ever hereafter send any of the Royall Companys servants away without the consent of the Agent Generali at Cabo Corso Castle, and that if any white man abuse the blacks, they are to make their complaints as aforesaid. Postremo, That noe person or persons presume to make any further pallaver about this building upon any pretence whatsoever so as to demand any other custome more then the ten sayes, and that the Agent Generali order the building as he shall thinke most advantagious for the use of the Royall Company without any Jett or molestation , great gm1s only excepted. Upon this the king desired that the tenn sayes should be presently payed, and that when the house is ffinished he may be allowed someth ing per month as an acknowledgment and that ifhe sends cracra mony the ffacter may have an order to take it, and be payed his yearly custome at the danceing time. To the first of which I have agreed, finding after he had been soe civill to me I should have very much provocked him ifl had persisted ffarther, and told him I did not question but your Worship would grant the rest. Upon this they signed the articles and delivered them to me in the name of your Worship, the king and both Ffeteras, 41 first kissing them. In like manner I delivered them your, so that I think the contract is firmly enough established, and we have nothing to doe more but to go on with our work as fast as we can. I thought it convenient to give your Worship a full account of all our proceedings, and Jett you know that if I had went up empty handed the business would never have been ended or at least brought to that perffection tis, soe that I hope you will be pleased to allow my charges, which were noe more then what meer necessity itselfe required, yett far to great for me to bare. I shall troble you no farther at present, only hope that what I have now done is to your Worship and Councells sattisfaction, and shall ever remayne, I have sent the 7 hand cano for some narrow nicconees, powder sheets and one pound basons ifftheir be any, the two pounder dont sell at 3 lb per angle. 207. William Cross Commenda, 9 Dec. 1686 By the 7 hand cano I have received one baile ofnatTow nicconees, quantity 120, and twelve barells of powder. This morning with Mr Elwes and Mr Halford I took an account oftbe warehouse and all the Royall Company concerns here in order to your Worships commands. Yesterday, I sent the 7 hand cano, and want more narrow nicconeees, sheets and one pound basons [ms. 'basasons'). For powder we have enough at present. 208. William Cross Commenda, 12 Dec. 1686 This morning with Mr Elwes wee overhalled the warehouse againe, and tooke a particular accompt of all the damnified goods; and have valued them according to the best of our judgments. I received the bale of narrow nicconees and three casks of two pound basons by the 7 hand canoe, but there were twenty wanting in one caske no.38, as per certificatte. This with my humble service to your worship and Councill is all at present from [myself], only I have sent another copie of November account. 209. WiUiam Cross Commenda, 14 Dec. (1686] I have occasion for some good sayes, pewter basons and a cask of rum, which I desire your Worship to send as soon as possible with conveniency. 210. William Cross Commenda, 15 Dec. 1686 Yours of yesterdayes date I bave received with the goods, according to invoyce , and sent you by Ridley Horsford ffifteen marke of gold . I have more money by mee of John Cabesses, and others which is not blowed nor weighed , and he being gone to the Mina cant send itt now . Last Ffriday I paid the King the tenn sayes according to the contract and on Satter day ffo llow ing he sente the Ffette[r]a to call all the Commenda Cabusheers to Aguaffoe, and hes ordered them to begin ffetching up of our stones one [= on] Tuesday next. Wee have three great beapes, and those that are very good, and only want the workmen . What pewter caske for the future comes shall be returned, the other I gave to the people that bougt the basons. By this canoe came likwise Mr James Wheeler whome I shall treat civilly, and give him incouragement according as I finde him careffull of the Royall Companys concerns. Att Christrnass I thinke to kiss yow worships hande. I have sent downe what empty cases, caskes &c I have by mee. Two of the weomen slaves, Agaba and Mandeloe, asked leave on Satterday to goe to Caboe Corsoe and are not rettumed yett. 211. unsigned Commenda, 17 Dec. 1686 Y oms by the return of the cano with three gree n perpetuanoes I have received. The occasion of my writeing now, is the sending down the bearer with four wedges and one crow that wants mending. I gave all along a strict charge to have a care of there tooles but the stone is soe hard tw iU force steel! itselfe. The two women slaves mentioned in my last are not returned. [PS] The damnified sayes I sell at 1 Oa, thinking it conven ient to dispose of them as soon as I can , fearing they may grow worse, and for the damnified nicconees, &c I will gett the most I can. 212. William Cross Commenda, 22 Dec. 1686/7 [sic] Yours by the 11 hand cano with the goods according to invoyce I have received but there [are] a dozen hafts more or less damnified. Here lyes the Deans interloper still, which is a great hindrance to my trade, for elce I should have sold all the sayes, and a great many other goods. He has been out of Flushing near three months, and tells me we shall have war with Holland upon the account of Bantam. 42 Yesterday by order from the king of Aguaffo , we had some of ourstones brought up, and tomorrow he bas also ordered the Mereen to stop thecanomen and sett them to bring up the rest, as fast as they can. 213. William Cross Commenda , 1 Jan. 1686 (= 1687) By this cano I have sent down my account and 3mk 2o 13a Ita [ which] with the 15m and 14 mark received before makes 32 mk 2oz 13a lta being the ball a nee. OnThursday night Captain Hosea came to an ancho r in this road, and had a good tradeyesterday. After his departure I shall send for such goods as I find their will beoccasion for, I must expect no trade as long as he lyes here. I desire your Worship would be pleased to send me a little paper, pens and inck for I have hardly any of either left. 214. William Cross Commenda, 5 Jan. 1686/7 These are to desire you to send me one bail of narrow nicconees, about 50 ironbarrs and twenty one boysadoes , together with some sheets and blew perpetuanoesif this last ship hath brought any. Captain Hosea has disposed of most of his cargoeand Jsuppose will be down tonight. Pray be pleased to send a quire or two of paper(and] per the next you shall have another coppy of last months account. 215. William Cross Corruncnda, 6 Jan. 1686/7 Yours with the goods according to contents I have received and hope they are come to a quick markett . As for Edward Jack lias sallery I allowed it him the lastand these two months to stock him selfe with cloths, or elce he must have wentnaked, and for the .1 oz 8a given to the king of Aguaffos officers and souldiers Ihope your Worship will be pleasd to allow, for Ile [= I'll] assure you it is not 1ofwhat it cost me, being myselfe above two ounces more out of pockett , and yet Iwent as nea r as the state of the business at that time would pennitt. The slave I sent down I took not as a pawn, but bought him outright and have often sent to knowwhere[ = whether] they would redeem him, but never heard from them and whereto find them now I cannot tell. Here are all things ready if you please to send theworkmen to goe fforward to the bui lding before the rains come, and if there is notstone enough broak the slaves can break near as much more before this wi ll be layd, but the Cabushe rs are very unreasonab le in their demands about bringing them up, for they will have mony as well as drink, which because I would not givethem there is part of the stones lye behind, but yesterday I sent up a man to the king about it, who is very much displeased witb them, and will send an officer down today to have the remaynes of the stones brought up and further the building in everything according to contract. I received but 16 two pound basons instead of nineteen. 216. William Cross Commenda, 8 Jan. [16]86/7 Yours of yesterdays date I have received and shall observe your orders. I payd Edward Jacklin his last two months sallery and have Jett him have 8a as I wrote towards his cloths till next pay day, and desire to know where [= whether] I must stop all bis sallery for the future or allow him dyett. By the bearer I have sent one crow and two wedges that wants mending. Yesterday a Cabusher of Aguaffo came down by order of the king to look affter the bringing up of our stones and the Tatea 43 was sent about to stop the canomen and this morning accordingly they went to work, but affter they had brought about. of them al I the Cabushers came to demand brandy, I told them when all were brought up they should have an ancor of rum for the canomen and three gaJlon amoung themselves, but that would not sattisfie them without an ounce of gold more, so that being in a streight, haveing no order from your Worship, upon second thoughts, I told them I would move it to you, with which they were welJ enough sattisfied in case[ = on condition] I would give them the rum imediatly down upon their promis that the stones should be brought up, to all which I was forced to condecend for they were in that rage I could compare them to nothing but a parcell of madmen , so the kings officers w ill stay here to se they are as good as their words. I will endeavour to gett it done for a peaz or two and that to be paid when all the stones are brought. I layd the case down playn enough if they had eether since [= sense] or reason. Here is a Brandenburge came to an anchor, and we here tbeir is a French ship to windward with materialls to build at Ampena. 44 217. William Cross Commenda , 13 Jan. 1686/7 These are to desire you to send a bail or two of narrow nicconees, two or three hundred three pound basons, some sheets if any, and twenty flowered silk longees for John Cabess if you can afford them at 5a per piece , and if their is anything elce that you think may sell pray be pleased to send it. I have not had so quick a dispatch as I used to have because my Arcania merchants are not come down yett, and what mony is brought to the town people they send on board the French ship now at Succondee. Your Worship was speaking I remember of building a house for the slaves and now here is a very good house of an Arcanyes lately deceasd to be disposed of over against ours and likewise the windwardmost house, for which they ask one ounce, which will be cheaper considering the loss of time than such a one can be built. With this comes two coppies of December account and by the return of the cano you shal I have the loz 8a that is due to ballance. 218. William Cross Commenda, 14 Jan. 1686/7 The occasion of my writeing is to desire that you would be pleasd to order the mending of these wedges and their return as soon as possible, for these are all we have, and that you would send the goods I write for with all convenient speed. 219. William Cross Commenda, 21 Jan. 1686/7 By James Bayly I have sent down six marks, three ounces of gold with one ounce, eight angles for the ballance of December last account of which I desire a rece ipt. I should have continued my trade had not the arrival! of these ships put a stop to it, but I hope shall have it againe after their departure. I have taken two bales narrow nicconees ofMr Bayly and received them by the cano, which I beleive will goe off if no other shipping comes down upon the head of these , with my humble servis to your Worsh ip and Councell and continuall prayers for your health and prosperity is what offers at present [PS] Only shall want some iron barrs which pray send per first. 220. William Cross Commenda, 22 Jan. 1686/7 Benjamin Broadgate being very sick and weak, upon his request have sent him down and desire you would be pleasd to send another man in his stead by the return of the cano , one that is honest and civill. I have bin of late somewhat out of order but am upon the recovery ofmy health againe, I thank God, only a little troubled with the toothach. 221. William Cross Commenda , 26 Jan. 1686/7 Last night here came to an anchor in this roade a small vessell, being an interloper from Barbadoes , and as I hear intends to corn, and gett what slaves he can, if not designs for Annamaboe. He has perpetuanoes and other goods on board , though tis given out only for rum and sugar. This morning passes by near two hundred Mine canoes to rout the French from Taccardo, 45 and another party came affter to Ampena where they have taken away their boat and five men, that were left to look after her while the rest went on shore, and carried them to the Mine. They [ = the French] have been up with the king of Aguaffo and design a settlement there likewise and so along the Coast if not prevented. We here from the interloper that they have another ship to windward, which is all the vessels he saw. I thought it requisit e to advise your Worship hereof, so I hope you will be pleasd to excuse this troble. I have occasion for some iron barrs and desire you would be pleased to send word where ["" whether] I must pay Edward Jacklin any part of his sallery. 222. William Cross Commenda, 28 Jan . 1686/7 Yours by the 11 band cano I have received with the one hundred ninty and nine iron barrs, one falling short upon twice telling them over, first out of the cano and againe into the warehouse. I hope they are come to a good marquett , but they all keep up their mony in expectation of these shipping, when they hear of that is over I shall have a brisk trade againe. We are hard put to it for room, our warehouse not holding above one third of our goods, so that I am forced to lett the barrs, bailes, case[s], goods lye out in the next room, which makes me want conveniency of lodging for our people. The little interloper weighed yesterday morning and stood down. 223. William Cross Commenda, 3 Feb. 1686/7 By the bearer I have sent Smk 13a which with the 6mk 3oz I sent before by Mr James Bayly makes l lmk 3oz I 3a, being the ballance of last month[s] account. If shipping forbear comeing a little here will be againe a good trade on shore. I have likewise sent a coppy of my account, and you shall have another by the next convenience. 224. William Cross Commenda, 7 Feb. 1686/7 Here are lately come down the Arcania merchant s with a new Captain, 46 they haveing given and taken hostage of the king of Aguaffo for a trade and safe passage. They have bin with me and demand halfe a peice of say, and 3 gallons rum , for which I have agreed to pay this day , the Dutch paying the same yesterday. lfyour Worship pleases lo order me some tallow and perpetuanoes I shall have a quick dispatch for them , and as to the stones I beleive their are near enough broak with the bricks that are here to finish the house , if you design it but fo1ty foot long &c, but we shall want more lyme. 225. William Cross Commenda, 10 Feb. 1686/7 There is here happened a difference between we and the Dutch about tbc stone place , they takeing upon them to tum our slaves from the ground we have cleared,and stand so far in opposition as to tell us we shall break no more on the side of the river, the ground being theirs, wbich I suppose was occasioned by the GrandeeCoopeman 47 comeing beither from the Mine yesterday, they designing some quarrell with us, but they sent since to tell us they would give leave to carry up thercmayns of our stons ifwe made hast, as ifwe must be beholding to them.I humbly give your Worship and Counce ll this account first and shall lett themalone till I know your pleasure, being unwilling to be the author of any disturbance, though I am sure I can make my part as good as theirs at anhowers warning, and not only so for it is a thing the king of Aguaffo will notsuffer, he sending his man but the day before to tum them away. I have sent JohnRatleife for your Worships farther sattisfact ion in this affair, and thinking the bestway may be to acquaint the king with it or at least the Generall of the Mine, forthey say it is per his order. [PS] I have sent another coppy of my account. 226. William Cross Commcnda, 12 Feb. 1686/7 Yours of the 10th instant I received and sett our slaves yesterday to breaking ofstons as formerly, but today the Dutch has tumd them away pretending the groundand place to be theirs, which I have born with it being your Worships order that Ishould make no opposition but advise immediatel y. I have therefore accordinglysent the bearer away, this happening about eleaven a clock this morning. There isno enmity between Mr Ensworth and me as I know of but what is done by order ofthe Generali of the Mine. Now I suppose if the king of Aguaffo is acqua inted withthis he will not suffer their proceeding s, for he sent and tumd them away once, as lwrote before , but I cant tell wbat pallaver they may have made with him since,their pretentions are that the place belongs to them as a waitering place and thatthey are now breaking stones to inclose itt with a wall, but that is only to cheat theblack(s) , their design being to gett a wall round their houses . It may be convenientthat Mr Chambers come up (if your Worship and Councell shall please) and putthe building forward, for I beleive theyr are near stones enough broak but theblacks have been very backward in bringing them up. I have hired them forTuesday next and they have promised all their assistance. The Arcanyes mised comeing down this week so that here has been but a smalltrade, but J here they will be all here on Munday. I have bought a house over against the Factory containing six rooms for four damnified narrow nicconees vallued at about I .a per piece, for before we had no conveniency of lodging for our slaves and people under two angles per month. 227. William Cross Commenda, 17Feb. 1686/7 Yours by Samuell Chambers I have received and he is now setting the slaves to work to clear the ground for the foundations , the stons he very well approves off, but thinks we shall have occasion for more than are broak and what he finds cheifly wanting are six or eight men slaves more, one hundred 4d nails, two hoggsheads to keep watter in and some iron bound tubbs for morter, the slaves are to helpe bring up the great stons. This morning early returnd Captain Nuna from Aguaffo, whome I sent up to acquaint the king of the insolency of the Dutch in presuming to tum our slaves from the place [that] was assigned us by him and his Cabushers, to break stone in, he brought word the king would suffer no quarrell between we and the Dutch and that the place fo1merly belonged to them, and they have since claimed it for a wattering place, but if he cant shew us as good a place as that he will make a pallaver with them and we shall goe their againe; in order to which the cheife Mereen is comeing down today from the king, who desires your Worship to send his silver headed stick.48 I have taken two rooms into one and fitted them with conveniency where I can put three or four hundred chests of corn, which I shall endeavour to purchase according to order. Here has been but very little trade of late, the Arcanyes not comeing down as formerly, but I here their pallaver is allmost ended. I have sent down by the return of thfa cano two women slaves which are uncapable of doeing the Royall Company any servis. 228. William Cross Commenda , 21 Feb. 1686/7 These comes by Captain Bristow, and are to acquaint your Worship that the foundation of the house is open and tomorrow Mr Chambers thinks to order the laying of the first stone, but be finds the ground so infirm that be desire s you would be pleased to save what more plank there is and send it with all convenient expedition, and the men slaves we wrote for before. The blacks tell us we covett for stone when we have no need , for they expected a larger fabrick. The king will order us our stone place againe and has sent to me twice or thrice about. We are now sinking a hole and have found a very good spring of fresh water within pistole shott of the factory which will be very advantagious. 229. William Cross Commenda, 23 Feb. 1686/7 Yours of this days date between 3 and 4 of the clock this afftemoon I have receivedand shall take care to send the cano and letter up to Succondee when shee comes,w[h]ere I here Captain Draper now is. I have made my pallaver with theCabusheers &ca for com, which they have promised at l.a per chest and mostof them will take goods, but they say that the next ship that takes in corn shall pay2a per chest and that they will not suffer the com which l shall buy to be shipt onboard any of the Company ships, they reserveing that priviledge to themselves , butthat your Worship send for it by the sloope [or] otheiway as you shall please toorder, they think to ingross the coming of ships to themselves, hereing com isscarse elcewhere, 49 which 1 suppose has occasioned them to make this pallaver.Mr Chambers present[s) his (service] to your Worship and will wait upon you onSatturday. The cano I here lyes at the Mine. 230. William Cross Commenda, 24 Feb. 1686/7 This accompanies Mr Chambers, who is desireous to waite upon you lo know yourfurther pleasure about the building. This morning arrived the 9 hand cano with thedeals and plank , and understand by Mr Wheele r, that they would put in at the Minewhether he would or no, elcc they might have been here yesterday, and now theyare come they are so obstinate I cant gett them to goe to Succondee this morning,but will stay till they se their own time. I have not more to advise at present only Ipartly understand by the Cabusheers today that l shall have liberty to ship of cornaccording to order. (PS] These are only to advise you that the cano stoped yesterday from 9 in themorning tell past night at the Mine for no occasion in the the world as I can tell buttheir faulce pretension of the wind blowing two hard, but I know had we continuedon our way might have been here by 1 a clock that day, so I hope nothing will bepayd to my charge therein. James Wheele r. 231. William Cross Commenda, 27 Feb. 1686/7 The occasion ofmy writting now is to send the inclosed with all possib le speed toyour Worship and Councell, it being from Captain Draper, who came this eveningto an anchor in our road about five of the clock. 50 All that J have more to add, is toacquaint you that the people keep up their com in expecta tion of a better marqucttfrom the ship then (= than] on shoar, so that I gott but little as yett. 232. William Cross Comenda, 3 March 1686/7 By thee bearer I have sent down last months mony and accompts, and by the next you shall have another coppy, till when I hope you will be pleased to excuse me, being a little indisposed. I have occasion for a hundred or two of iron bans and what pewter you can spare. The merchants begin to come down as formerly , and the heate of shipping being a little over , makes me hope for a good trade again. We have gott three quines 51 out of the ground, and are about the bass's of the flankers; the work might have been forwarder had we more hands; for we are forced to imploy two of our bricklayers to fetch stone. I have been at great charges to the people about bringing them up and notwithstanding all their fair promises, I never found them so good as their words. On Satterday they will goe to work again and I have promised them more palme wine for their incouragement. Mr Chambers desires you to send up as many more slaves as you can spare, for their is no trusting to these people, give them what you will. 233. William Cross Commenda , 8 March 1686/7 This accompanyes Mr James Bayly in the Adventure Sloope, from whome I have supply'd the Factory with such goods as are chiefly wanting, only pewter he has none. I have likewise by him sent down twenty eight chests com, which is all I had by me, the people not being so good as their words in bringing in their corn according to promis, and when they do will give them but little better than stlickt measure by a chest out of the warehouse. I shall endeavour to purchase what I can and have hopes of a considerable quantity in a short time, but I partly find they keep up their com in expectation of raising it, hearing it is very scarse to leward. Mr Chambers desires you would be pleased to send some more slaves with all convenjent expedition, which would very much forward our work. 234. William Cross Commenda, 14 March 1686/7 These from[= by) Mr Chambers are to acquaint you that we have gott the square above ground, and are goeing on with the flankers with all possible speed, and that we shall want some more lime old plank; and the <lore cases, which we desire you would be pleased to order by first opertunity. Here is an indifferent trade, the road being seldom free from Dutch interlopers. 235. William Cross Commenda, 15 March I 686/7 Haveing several] times received severall abuses from Mr Wheeler since his comeing up, but more especially last night when he took upon him to hector and huff me as he pleased and to tell me he would turn me out of the Factory, makes me at this time humbly give your Worship and Councill this accompt of his behaviour. His whole endeavour is I find to defame me as he can, and he has don openly now; what before he did by way of detraction to the Dutch man; his design I suppose is to gett the Facto1y; but that is not at all takeing with the people here, by whose instigation I che ifly send this, being very unwilling to make any complaint was not I vecy much necessitated to it. I shall troble your Worship and Counc ill noe further at present, only desire you would be pleased to take this into cons ideration. Be pleased to send twelve ban-ells powder, six chest of sheets and what pewter you can spare by the first oppertunity. 236. William Cross Commenda, 17 March 1686/7 15thYours of the instant about four a clock in the evening yesterday by the Companys slaves I have received. These are to accompany Mr Wheeler, who comes down according to your Worships order, and I desire you would be pleased to give him a full hearing in evecy thing he has to say against me, and ifl am found faulty I humbly submitt to your Worship and Councells censure; be bas taken upon him to demand the warehouse out of my hands, which I was unwilling to grant till he had finished some other business about my books I put him upon, and this was the first occasion of our disagreeing, but the other night he was so high with me as to abuse me by opprobrious words as he pleased. Since he has been more submissive and seems to be sorry for what he has done, and if he will beg your Worships and Councells pardon, and promis to mind on ly the Compan ies business, I am willing to receive him again with all the kindness and respect I showed him at his first coming, for I find he is a person fitting to serve them and assist me. The Al legator Sloope arrived here yesterday in the afternoon; and if you have any blew perpetuanoes be pleased to send a bail or two of perpettuanoes by the return of this cano, and the bulces. 52 237. William Cross Commenda, 22 March [16]86/7 thYours of the 15of this instant by Mr Pepperel153 I received, with the goods and other materialls therein mentioned, and by the return of the sloope have sent down eighty five chests of com, which is what I had by me , but shall endeavour to purchase what more may be as fast as I can. There comes a crow which wants mending, and Mr Chambers would have it made flatt at both ends, and sent by the first conveniency, with three new wedges. By what I understand here , Captain Gold may be to windward, if not now at Succondee, for we heard the gunns this morning. Yours of the 18th instant by Mr James Wheeler I have likewise received with one baile of blew perpetuanoes. 238. William Cross Commenda, 23 March 1686/7 Yours of the same instant came this night to my hand, and accordingly I have sent the enclosed to Mr Bucknell at Succondee and shall endeavour to buy up all the come, that I can possible gett at the rate mentioned . Mr Chambers is a little indisposed, and thinks to wait upon your Worship on Satterday if he can come down. With convenienceys that which is cheifly wanting to the building is the crows, wedges, lime, bricks and stone, these here being almost worked up. I hear of a Dean and Pourtugueze to windward, but noe English ship. Stones are the cheifest materialls we want, and are setting the slaves to break more. 239. William Cross Comrnenda, 25 March 1687 This serves cheifly for a cover to the enclosed, being only to desire some more blew perpetuanoes and sheets, what you can spare, and rum for the use of the Factory, when the sloope comes up. I have bad an indifferent good trade, and shall girt com apace I bope; but I am forced to pay mony for most of itt and take little better than striked [= strict] measure. 240. William Cross Comrnenda, 28 March 1686 [sic: = 1687) Yours of the 26th instant with the goods according to invoyce I have received, and hope tuey are come to a good marquett. As soon as the month is up sbaJI send down my account and mony. 241. William Cross Commenda, 31 March 1687 This comes by the return of the nine hand cano, which brought up ten deal boards and six women, two boyes and two girl slaves, but Mr Chambers tells me there is wanting Sayes wench and Boffery and Pishepans two daughters, which should have come up now according as your Worship ordered. We have sett them all to work, and hope the building will go apace , which we endeavour to forward with all convenient expedition . On Satturday or Munday at farthest l shall send down my mony and accounts, and then write for such goods as I find occasion for. I have near 80 chests of com by me, and hope shall gett as much more, by the latter end of next weak. 242. William Cross Commenda, 2 April [16)87 These come by Nathanicll Western, by whome I have sent last months accountwith the ballance, and by the next will send another coppy. The goods T haveoccasion for are blew perpettunaoes , three bailes ; six chests sheets; two casessayes; twenty whole firkins tallow ; one hundred paper brawlcs; which be pleasedto send per the first opertunity. Yesterday send up Nuna to the King of Aguaffo; with an anchor of rum, as custome upon putting his com in the ground, which isaccepted kindly enough, and has promised send to send down 100 scaffold poles,but told him rum was a liquor the people there did not much care for, and desiredan anchor of brandy more, and that should sattisfie him.Here has been an indifferent good trade this month, and if your Worship andCouncell are pleased to order an anchor of brandy amoung the merchants , I amcertain twill not be lost, being an encouragement for them to bring their mony tothe Factory, 243. Samuell Chambers Commenda, 2 April 1687 These are to give you an account of our proceedings in the building, which isfotwarded with all possible expedition, haveing gott up the flankers almost evenwith the other work, which when is leavcld wi ll rise a pace with bricks, which wemust make use of amoungst the stone in the outside. The cheifest thing stillwanting is stone, which breaks very hard, so desire you'! be pleased to send us assoon as possible a very large maull, and wedges, and a crow square pointed, for weare goeing on to break stone in two places. The next thing will be lyme, which 1hope you'I supply within a short time. The s laves Bofferys girl and Pickinine,Sayes wife, are come here, which were wanting.I understand we are promised some scaffiing poles from the king, which willdo us a kindness. I have nothing more to add at present, but will use my bestendeavour in forwarding the work that it may go on with all expedition. 244. William Cross Commenda, 5 April 1687 Yours of the 4th instant by the 11 hand canoe with one hundred blew perpetuanoes ,three hundred and ninty sheets, two hundred and forty paper brawles, thirty wholeffirkins tallow, and twenty sayes, I have received, and hope they are come to agood marquetl. By the return of the cano I have sent down 30 chests of corn, and asfor cases here are none but what I make use of in the warehouse and about thecome. Doctor Griffin parted from hence about ten this morning, intending for theMina tonight , and tomorrow will waite upon your Worship at Cabo Corso. 245. Samuell Chambers Commenda, 5 April 1687 This is to acquaint you that the greatest of our want is stones, which I have endeavourd as much as in me lyes, yett canot supply fast enough. I have advised with Mr Cross to set some of the slaves to gett some more thetch and cover the house; and then with your Worships leave desire to come to Cabo Corso tell there be a good quantity of stones broak and brought to the work. Pray send some more lym by the first opertunity. 246. William Cross Comenda , 22 April 1687 These accompany Mr James Wheeler, who finding his distemper to increase desires to come down in time, hoping to finde a remidy att Caboe Corsoe Castle. The people conserned in the pallavar about one angle in a bendy54 waited my coming up with longing expectations to know your worships pleasure in it; which when they found would not be allowed, brought them upon very high tennes, in soe much they told mee they would brande our house and by a pallavar stope all traders from bringing any money to the ffactory, which pallavar they accordingly made yesterday, and since I have taken noe money. The authors of this are the Captain of the merchants, alias old Tom, and one Captain Petter.55 This is a verry unreasonable demand, when they themselves give the Duch what they requiree from us. I have sent to the King and he sayes the same and today will send downe aboute it. This with my humble service to your worship and Councill, wishing you your good health and prosperity, being all att present , only this pallavar if brought to perfection will be very disadvantagious to the Royall Affrican Companyes intrest. 247. William Cross Comenda , 27 April 1687 Yours of the 20 instant by the Allegator Sloope I have received, with the goods and other materialls according to invoyce; and she had been downe soner bad the weather been favorable while unlading. The trade is stopt still, and will be as far as I understand till there is some consideration alowed. But ifit should come to that , which I thinke as umesonab le as their demands, it may be alledged that whereas the Dutch have been the first promoters of this at Succondee and elce where, let them begin here, and your worship will give a sattisfactory answer, for by what I heare the Dutch have putt them upon this to hinder our trade; which I really beleive is true, because they have given every Cabushere of any conseme a new cloath besides brandy. 248. William Cross Commenda, 30 April 1687 Tis now since the 20 instant, tenn dayes our trade has been stoped, which the country merchants with longing expectations and money in their hands have patiently waited, hoping an accommodation. In the meane time, I hant bene idle with these people here, endeavouring by all the arguments I thought most convenient , and their kind entertainment with what the ffactory affords , to reduce them as fotmerly. Upon the recept ion of yours yesterday I acquainted them of your worships and Councills finall resolution in not allowing any thinge upon soe unresonable demands, and after a longe pallavar, the kings cashe keeper and Mereen being present, thought I had composed the whole affaire, when in the end twas concluded that ifl would give them a bendy to drinkc all things should be quietly settled, and they would make the country merchants take of those goods that were not as well as those that were vendable. This morning I sent for them againe, and by the assistance of the Mareen and kings cash keeper have made up the pallavar, and the trade is now open and the money coming in as fast as I can take itt, butt they insisted on the same demands as yesterday and I gave them the same answer. The Mereen and other likewise expect a peice for wating here these eight dayes about this buisness; they spoake very well today in the companies behalfe, and told me in privatt that if they some time gave some small dasbees among the people, as the Duch doe, wee shold live more quiett without any paIla vars if they will play the rogue againe. 249. Will iam Cross Commenda, 4 May 1687 Trade coming in againe as formerly occations these lines, desiring you would be pleased to send what blew perpettuanoes, sheets and sayes you can convenient ly spare . If the sayes are damnified rate them accord ingly, and I can dispose of them, and if there is not the other goods send a baile of narrow nicconees and paper brawles, or what elce you may thinke proper for tmis place. My accompts and money lies ready to come downe by the Allegattor Sloope, which arived yester .day, and now are getting the things outt, and shall dispatch her downe with come as soon as possible . If Captain Nuna has don his buissiness, be pleased to send him up againe to looke after the money. 250. William Cross Comenda, 7 May 1687 Yours of the 14 instant by the 7 hand canoe, with the goods according to invoyce, I have received, and was forced to keepe her a little, the other wanting mending, to help dispatch the Allegator Sloope. By ditto I have sent downe 17m 7o 12a 6ta, which with the 20mk 3o 8a makes 37rnk 7o 4a 6ta. being the ballance of laste months account. I have likewise shiped on board her one hundred thirty six chests of come, all measured, on boarde, and that their may be noe mistake have sent downe the chest I bought it by, which Mr Whittings 56 being bigger may occation what was before, or elce the slaves ran away with some of it. 251. William Cross Commenda, 13 May 1687 These are to desire you to send one baile of narrow nicconees and Guynea cloutts, twenty boysadoes, tenn barre lls of powder, and as many iron barrs besides as the canoe will bringe. Here is plenty of money, and as soone as Captain Gould 57 hath donn wee shall have the trade againe on shoare. Tis now a yeare and halfe and as much as since the 12 of Aprill laste I have been att Commenda, and desire you would be pleased to grant mee an order for sallary, and hope if itt may be allowed as per establishment , you will give that encouragment, considering the troub le and charge I am att and the many dashees I am forced to give away for the advancement of the Royall Affrican Companies intreste bringing the trade to what itt is, or else there is noe peace, quiettness or living amoungst such people as these are. 252. William Cross Commenda , 18 May 1687 There being now noe shipping here and a faire prospecte of trade againe, these are to desire you would be pleased to send those goods I writt for in my laste, as soone as the weather will permitt, for itt has been verry extreame here and abundance of raine fallen, butt I don't find itt has done any harme to the building, though it hinders us sometimes from breaking stones, by filling the place with watter, butt that defecte is supplyed by the slaves bringing up those that are broaken. Here has been a flying reporte of a pyratt upon the coaste, with 100 men and 24 guns; and that he has tooke one of the Companies ships, called the St John, which does not any wayes seem credible, though some of the Blacks affinne it still. 58 When the month is up I shall waitte upon your worshipe and bring downe with mee my money and accompts. I lay out all the wayes that possible I can for come, butt find it verry scarce, att present. 253. Wlliam Crosse Comenda, 18 May 1687 Yours of the 12111instant by the Maynards boat 1 have received, and likewise tenn chests of sheets and two bailes of blew perpetuanoes, having a supply of tallow by mee and no occasion for cases of spiritts, they being no vendible commodity in this place. I keep a distinct accompt of my say Ies and shall bring it to Junes accompt, as you have ordered me, and the mony with me, when I come down with this months accompt, but giving my receipt in this month and not bringing them to accompt till the next I humbly move it to you, fearing hereafter it may occasion some e1rnr or mistake , and that you would be pleased to advise me herein by the return of the bearer. 254. William Cross Comenda, 28 May 1687 Wee have been according to your order att Aguaffoe with the king, endeavor ing to seeke redress for all those continewall abuses that are dayly putt upon us in this place, which affter a greatt deale of trouble, unresonable charges and three dayes waitting wee have there words for att lastte, and thatt for the ffuture there shall never be any body forst [= forced] away without first acquainting your worship and Councell, and the same wass confirmed here yesterday by all the Cabusheers of this place; butt all this, as farr as I understand by there pallavar, is with this proviso, thatt the Royall Company shall pay the kinge two peize per month till the house be build, and when built one bendy per month for ground rent, 59 and to begin this pallavar I was turned away, they nott knowing elce hansomly to bring itt aboutt, for the old fellow mett mee att Aguaffoe, and affter wee bad concluded our buisness makes this pallavar anew with the King and Fetteras, and has insensed them soe farr, that I was once afraid the King would not have Jett mee come away till they had your answer, butt att laste it was concluded I should goe to Commenda, and from thence thus move itt to your worship and Councell that if you will nott grant the King two peaze per month while the house was building and one bendy per month when built for ground rent, then you are to breake down the house, send for all the Royall Companyes goods and concemes away , and depart their countrey, and there is nobody shall wrong them of the least cracra or abuse us when going off, but if you will grant this we shall be very quiet and peaceable and the king will take us into his protection and endeavour the advancement of the Royall Affrican Companys interest , as he has done allready without any con.sideration from them by granting the merchants of all countreys a free passage through his and in sending them down with their money to our Factory. You are to chuse (pardon my style for I write after theirs) one of these two which you please and send them an answer immediately , or else to expect and take what follows, for this is the resolution of the king and all of them. We used the best of our endeavour to compose and moderate this affair, but all signifyd nothing for this is a law confirmed like that of the Medes and Persians, for they doe as good as tell us they will have a grant for this or otherwise play the roague. I shall trouble you no further at present, but leave the rest to Hansicoe ,60 who I thinke has faithfully performed the charge you were pleased to commit to him. 255. William Cross Commenda, l June 1687 Yours of yesterdays date I received and have followed your instructions, which accordingly proved very successfull, for by sending for Old Tom privately this morning, and telling him the encouragement you were willing to give him, provided for the future he would be faithfull to us, and endeavour to hinder all pallavera 's that may be to our prejudice and end this, he was so well satisfied, that the tide is quite changed, and now be stands up as much for us as he was against us, and has wrought so effectually with the kings men that they are satisfied with what you have been pleased to allow him for a ground rent, and don't question but their Master will be the like and not suffer any more abuses to be put upon us, so for the future I hope we shall live more quitely or else we must endeavour to right our se lves. I was forced to give the kings men a peoz to drink before I could be rid of them. Old Tom says he will come down a Saturday next and wait upon your worship and Councill, and John Cabess tells me he will come too. Captain Thompson weighed this morning and is gon to windward .61 Here is come to be bad under 3 angles per chest. 256. William Crosse Comenda, 10 June 1687 I gott to Comenda last night but bad the misfortune to be oversett coming ashore and have lost most of my things and the mony that I brought up with me, which was taking from me when I was in the water either by the canoemen or some that came pretendedly to my assistance. All the Royall Companyes concemes here are safe and secure, and the goods ashore you was pleased to order me, and dont question but I shall have a very good trade again. [PS] By the return of the canoe I have sent down one woman slave and a girle that are sick and uncapable of any work. 257. William Crosse Comenda, 15 June 1687 This serves chiefly for a cover to the inclosed, being two coppyes of the last months accompt. I have almost finished another, but being hindred by business otherwayes shall lett it alone till next conveyance. Edward Jackline and Nathaniel! Westrane have been both very bad with an ague and feavor , butt today are a littlebetter and hope will recover if the next fitt don't pull them downe againe. Weehave had abundance of rain and badd weather, but don't find that it does prejudicethe building, though it hinder s our slaves from breakin g stones, and the over.flowing of the river has carried so great a bank of sand into the sea that the landin gplace is become very dangerous. 258. William Crosse Comen da , 23 June 1687 On Tuesday nigh t the Allegator Sloop from Succondee came here to an anchor, having two hundred iron barrs to putt ashore, but waiting all yesterday and nowlikewise the sea runnin g extraordinary high, so there is no possibility of gct1ing thegoods ashore or likely to be better weather, I thought it more proper to advise hiscoming down, knowing not whith er his absence with the corn may hinder CaptainGoulds dispatches. I have occasion for tenn ches ts sheets, two cases sayes, twobales of narrow niconees and one bale of paper bralls, which with the iron barrs be pleased to send by the Sloop if you do not otherwi se di[s]pose of her and MrChambers to foreward the building , for the Dutch are hard at it, thinking to have done befo re us. 259. William Crosse Comenda, 2 July 1687 Yours of yesterdays date last night I receiv ed, and according to order have sentdown Fozea Doe and Bashaw the Royall Companys slaves. Wee are breakingstones as fast as wee can, and others employ'd in bringing them up, and forscaffolding poles I wi II send again to the King or endeavour to gett them clswhere.Upon Captain Danicll s coming downe I went on board to know wheth er you hadany advise of his arrivall , and he told me Mr Bucknell was on board and said he was send down, which made me think it nccdlesse, so hope you will please toexcuse me, but for the future shall send on board all ships and immediately advise.Here lyes three or four Dutch interlopers up and downe , who have been a verygreat hinderance to the ffactory, but I hear they have now disposed of all so that lhope to have a good trade next weeke. I have sent downc another Mayes accomptand my accompts oflast. The mony will send per Mr Peppe rell, he is gott as higb asAmpenney. 260. William Crosse Comenda, 4 Jun e [sic:= Jul y?J 1687 By the Alligator sloop I received eight chests containing five hundred and twentysheetes, two bales containing two hundred and forty nanow nicconees , one bailecontaining two hundred and forty paper brawlcs and two hundred iron barrs, allwhich I hope will come to a good markett. l sent of yesterday to a vessell comin g down, which proved to be a Dutch Companys ship from the Beneen, and had been out tluee months and [said] that the Jacob Pink came out before them a month and had lost two men. They saw no shipping to windward more than a Dutch interloper and one of their Companyes ships . By Mr Pepperell I have sent the ballance of last months accompt. 261. William Crosse Comenda, 5 July 1687 The occasion of my writing is to acquaint you that it is now dancing time at Aguaffo and the King hath sent down people to demand his custome according to Articles of Agreement made between him and the Worshipful! Henry Nurse Esq, late Agent General! for the Royall Affrican Company of England , of Dece mber J686,62 vizt two anchors brandy and one say to be paid himselfe , one ankor of brandy to the Fettera, one clot h or gingham to the Queen, two angles in gold to the Chief Cappusheers of this place, two fine sletias and half an anchor of brandy to the merchants , and half a barrell of powder and half an ankor of brandy to the soldiers. 1 have few of those things by me as per my accompt, so have sent this canoe for what you are pleased to order, the Kings men being in great hast to begone again. Tunderstand he expected to be paid his custome without sending for it, wee hearing that twas now their dancing time. I have occasion for 10 boysadoes, which if the canoe will bring be pleased to send per her return. [PS] Pray be pleased to dispatch the canoe as soon as possible, and send the things by her with your order for their delivery. 262. William Crosse Comenda, 16 July 1687 Having had an indifferen t good trade, these are to desire you to send me 20 boysadoes , 2 bales of blew perpetuanoes, two bales of narrow niconees , fforty half ffirkins of tallow and tenn barrells of powder in wholes and halves. Pray be pleased so to order them away that they may be hear on Tuesday morning; The King was well satisfyed when I sent him his custome , and say's as soon as Mr Chambers comes up lett him send to him, and he will send a hundred men which he beleives will cutt as many scaffolding poles in one day as wee shall have occasion for. They must come this way for them, there being none to be gott nigher than Shuma. Wee have been all ofus here taken with agues and feavors and great pains in our limbs since the ffoggy weather came in, but I hope twill wear away again. Here just now came down a Dutch Companyes ship and I sent John Ratcliff to enquire what newes to windward, and the Capta in told him they saw no shipp &ca, but since came to our house the Copeman ofShuma with the Chief here and they tell me that the Mary is to windward and that they had it from the Captains own mouth, so hetold them one thing and us another 263. William Crosse Comenda, 19 July 1687 Yours of ycsterdayes date with the goods according to invoyce I have received ,vizt two hundred and forty narrow niconees , twenty five blew perperuanoes,eighteen boysadoes, ffo11yhalf ffirkins of tallow and tenn barrells of gunpowderseven whole and six halves all which I hope are come to a good markett. As to the tallow you mencon, tis three whole ffirkins which remaind undiposed of, beingvery much corrupted. When Mr Halford and Mr Bloome were sent to inventory thewarehouse, they then valued them worth nothing, but since disposing of one for2a.I made it about .damnified. I will send to the King again for the men hepromised to cutt the scaffolding poles, but I understand he wants Mr Chambers here first, and the bricklayers to forward the worke, and seemes concerned that theDutch are so far before us. Here arc a good quantity of stones broken, and most ofthem brought up round the building. That which will be chiefly wanting is lime.Yesterday morning one of our slaves went to cutt some wood, and comingthrough the com with it, chanced to break down a stalk with three cars upon it,whereupon they panniard him for stealing their com and kept him in irons,demanding one saye and half a barrell of powder for his redemption. I sent twicefor him yesterday but they would not lett him come , but today have sent to theKing and suppose shall gett him again with some small charge. 264. William Crosse Comenda, 25 July 1687 These are to desire you to send me fifty half ffirkins of tallow, one bale of paperbralls, twelve barrells of powder and one bale of black bafts broad, and if there areperpetuanoes or pewter basons be pleased to send me some with the othe r goods, and order them away so that they may here tomorrow morning if possible. I haveoccasion for my bulce and a gold chest for the better security of the mony insending it down. I have got! the slave again! write you was panniard for stealing ofcom, but it cost me four angles and about three gallons of brandy. I sent again tothe King about the scaffolding poles and he promises to gett some, as he has done agreat while, but I see none coming and believe we must send to Shuma at last togett some. 265. William Crosse Comenda, 27 July 1687 Both yours of yesterdayes date l have received and the goods by 17 band canoeaccordingly , vizt two hundred and forty paper brawles, one hundred broad blackbaf'ts, twenty five blew perpetuanoes, fifty halfffirkins of tallow, one hundred two pound pewter basins, and twelve whole barre Us of powder. By the return of this canoe I have sent down in the gold chest twenty four markes of gold. What I take more before the month is up you shall have with my accompts per the next conveyance. 266. William Crosse Comenda, 28 July 1687 I provided all things ready to have dispatched the canoe away again yesterday but the canoe men going into the town, these people and they fell out and they have gott broken heads on both sides. This morning by calling all the merchants and Cappusheers together, I have made them friends and composed the pallavera for the future. Henry Clement can satisfye you farther. I had a good trade yesterday and have sent down eightmarkes more in a leathern bulce, which with the24 in the other makes in all thirty two markes of gold. Pray be pleased to lett me have receipts. 267. William Crosse Comenda, 30 July 1687 Be pleased to understand that the people are mak ing a pallavera to turn me out, because I will not trust them with the Companys goods, and so ruin and discredit my self. They have another article against me too for selling the iron bans too dear, for where I give but 24 they can go to the Dutch ffactory and have 28 per bendy , and that I am too curious in blowing and picking their mony , and such like frivolous storyes. Tis only by the intercession of Old Pay and Captain Peter, two of the Chief Merchants, that I am not turned out before I could give you this accompt, for they are resolved to have another, which if you approve dispose with me otherwayes, as you are pleased to order, and I shall most readily obey. John Ratcliffe being very sick and weake, upon his request I have sent him down. [PS] Here will be wanting another man in John Ratcl iffs room. I have paid him his sallary . 268. Robert Elwes Comenda, 6 Aug. 1687 Last night between 7 and 8 of the clock I arrived here and this morning had all the Cappusheers with me, from whom I received a very kind welcome. I did not call in at the Mina, but since understand that the ship that came down two dayes since was an interloper taken to windward and sent downe. Likewise that the Generalls joumy to the King was purposely to remove the Ffrench men, wh ich was not granted.63 Great dashees was given on that intent, but not having his desire answerable to his expectacons, went away much discontented. Its reported that towindward are arrived three Ffrench ships. Traders are not as yctt returned, tarrying here on expectacon of goods, whichare one hundred half ffirkins tallow, two bales of black bafts, one bale of broadniconees, and two ditto of narrow ditto, one bale of paper bralls, twelve barrclls ofpowder, two hundred two pound pewter basons. What sheetes and perpetuanoesyou can spare , may be immediately dispo sed of. It is also desired by theCappusheers that Mr Chambers be sent up with what assistance can be sparedto forward the building , the Dutcll being much beforehand with us, This morn ing came Nunah, and according to your orders menconed the removaU of Mr Crosse,but (they] would give me no answer, only that he may come without anymolestacon to receive what belongs to him. 269. Robert Elwes Comenda, 12 Aug. 1687 Yours of the 8th and 9th instant have received, and according to your orderendeavoured as much the resetling Mr Cross as I could doe, butt the Cabusheers asI writte you before , soe now likwise would give mee noe answer, butt that hedeliver the Factory up and take his things away with him. Could scarce gett soemuch time from them , as to lett him tarry till the greatt canoe came up. Cannotunderstand Mr Cross has anywayes disoblidged them; butt as alwayes they havebeen rouges, soe I feare they will remayne. Not finding any probability of resettingMr Cross, have taken into my possession all the Royall Affrican Companyesmerchandizc and matterialls belonging to this Factory, as per invoyce does apear,for which l shall be accomptable for. As to re lating the Generalls gocing toAguaffoe, cannot understand it to be on any other accompt then what I writl you; ifotherwise shall advise. 270. Robert Elwes Commenda, 12 Aug. 1687 Yours of the IO instant have received, with two hundred and thirty narrownicconees, two l1undred blacke baffts , two hundred and forty paper brawles , two hundred two pound pewter basons, twenty whole firkins tallow, and thirty halfe,on acompl Royall Affrican Company of England. Desiarc you will send twohundred more blacke baffts, and twelve barrclls powder. The fine narrownicconees, which Mr Cross infonnes mee has been here some time, and will notsell att the price ordered, if you thinke convenient to sell them at 2a 6ta each,desiare your order, which I believe may be better then to rcmaine unsould, wee being much troubled with rattes, they may be damnified. Desire you will sendsome brandy and rume for the Factory, here not being any, and trade cannot beearryed on withoutt those supplyes. Since my writing my former understand theGenerall[s) joumy to Aguaffoe was on accompt of a pawnc of his, the king of Accraas sonn,64 who with others went up with goods to one Tagee, a rebell, 65 and they all being panniard by the king of Aguaffoe, itt happened that the said kings sonn of Accraa had his head cutt off, and all there goods taken away. Soe the Generali demanded sattisfaction, but not being granted, rettumed the same night in greatt anger. This is more I heare off. Mr Chambers presents his service to you, and desires the seaven hand canoe maybe sent backe in all hast for to fetch greatt stone , and that she brings up in her what lime shee cann . 271. Robert Elwes Commenda, 13 Aug. 1687 This serves only to desire you to send up six trowells and six hammers, which Mr Chambers advised mee to send for, being for the use of the building. He likwise desires you would send by the first opertunity what lime you possible can, imagining by Wednesday all the stocke here may be spent. The 7 band canoe I mentioned in my last came not downe to you, the canoemen being unwilling to carry her, soe desire you will give order to them when opertunity serves that she may be mended and made for use, which sha ll have occasion to imploy her in fetching stones, here not being any great stones, and at present have much want of them. 272. Robe1i Elwes Commenda, 14 Aug. 1687 Yours of the 13th instant have received, with one hundred and fifty broade blacke baftes, tenn whole barrells of powder, and one hundred and sixty mundee Binin cloaths, and two ankers of brandy. Here is noe come to be procured att present, butt hope by the first opertunity to supply you with tenn or twenty chests, butt must buy itt by the taccoees, which will be about two angles or more perr cheste. They are unwilling to give any more than a bendy for thirty four mundees , and soe att that ratte they will buy a considerable quantity, soe if you please to sell them soe, you may send two or three hundred more. Desire you will send one baile more of paper brawles; likwise an answer concerning the fine nicconees , tbe merchants being willing to buy them all. One of the baggs ofmundees contai ns butt thirty nine, the rest all forty, soe there is one wanting to make up the full complement. 273. Robert Elwes Commenda, 15 Aug . 1687 These are to desire you to send twenty good boysadoes , fifty halfe tirkins tallow,with the goods I write for yesterday, and that they may be here tomorrow; beingthe day traders will be here. Mr Chambers desires you wiII spare him all the boardsyou can for scaffaling , and what ould timber you can for to putt in the wall, thebrickes being safft. [PS] Mr Chambers desires a carpinter. 274. Robert Elwcs Comenda, 21 Aug. 1687 Yours of the 19th instant have received with two hundred and forty paper brawles,four hundred Benin mundee cloths, and forty seaven gallons rumme . Am sorrycannot be supplyed with boysadoes , knives , and Guinea stuffs. Provided you haveany boysadoes (although damnified), desire you would send ten, with the iron Iwrote for. Mr Chambers desires the sloop may be dispatcht in all haste with lyme,the last being but a small quantity , and soon workt up; have return ed the cask. Perthis canoe you will receive ten chests of new come. 275. Robert Elwes Comenda, 23 Aug. 1687 This comes by the retume of the 9 hand canoe, in whom have sent you downe eightchests of new come. Desire you would send me some iron barrs, and if you haveany damnified boysadoes could dispose of them. Have but little trade this eight lastdays, and not having goods proper cannot expect any. Mr Chambers desires youwould send in all halfe the lyme; he is now gon in the country to gctt scaffoldingpoles. No news to windward. 276. Robert Elwes Commenda, 25 Aug. 1687 This comes by Mr Chambers, who comes downe on account of some nccessarys heshall have occasion for the building. He will informe you concerning the scaffold.The other day he went in the country purposely to procure , but att bis retturne thekings Mareen demanded for their people bringing of them downe, two ounces anda halfc ancko r of brandy, butt provided they would bring downe one hundred andtwenty long and shortt and that may be fitting for our purpose in tenn dayes , theyshould have six peaze and halfe an anckor of rum, which they consented to, andone[= on) that intent the Mareen will this night goe to the king to gctt his people.The King likwise demands his monthly sallary att eight angles per month, whichbe sayes was never paid him in Mr Cros's time. I told him I know noth ing off ittbutt would informe you, and soe desire your answer concerning it. Mr Cross woulddoe verry well to send mee an accompt of all customes and there time when to be given, that therein I may not be to seeke when they demand it. I desire you would admitt of Mr Griffith's coming up here that he may give mee an accompt of all things att Agga,66 with the inventory delivered from whome shall goe there, that thereby I may discharge myselfe of that place, and then will send you those accounts, detennining the time I received this Factory. 277. Robe1t Elwes Commenda, nd These are sent on purpose to desire you to send Mr Chambers up, if w ith conveniency he can returne, for the people here are impatient till such time our ffort be don. The Dutch have finished their house but are still fetching stones, on what designe I know not. Yesterday the king sent to them, and told them since they had don their house, they should desist fetching any more stones, for he knew not whether the consequence might not be of great inconveniency. They tell me in ten days shall have what scaffolding poles wee want, and will be for their parts as assisting to us in building the fortification as possible they can. The like I told them would not be wanting in ours. But title trade this ten days, being hindred by some pallaveraes occasioned in the country, that they have not yett disposed of any goods already bought. Yours off the 23 instant by the Alligator Sloop have received, who arrived here last night, so as yett have not taken out the iron bans, nor lyme. Shall take care what wee can to retume the casks with the heads of them. Observe your orders in disposeing off the damnified goods for come, at I a 6 per chest, but yours of the 13 instant being so urging [= urgent] for come and I not knowing what occasion you might have for it, caused me to procure you six chests after the rate of 2a per chest, and beleive cannot gett any more under that price. Last night went downe a small Portuguez. Pray informe me whether you please to have the come sent downe in the sloop. 278. Robert Elwes Comenda, 30 Aug. 1687 This comes by a canoe bound downe to Cabo Corso and is to desire you to send twenty whole firkins of tallow. I hope Mr Pepperill may be with you tomonow. Wee have had a great deale of trouble to gett the lyme and iron ashore, of which I hope all will be ashore today or tomorrow early. The great canoe belonging to John Cabess is broken, so wee have been forced to make the more turns. I desire you would spare us a great canoe, for our seaven hand will not swim. 279. Robert Elwes Comrnenda, 3 I Aug. 1687 This accompan ies the Alligattor Sloope, from whom have received two hundrediron barrs and twenty eight caske of lime for the buildings. Have retturned thecaskes. Mr Chambers desires you would in all hast send up more lime, for this lastparse ll will not last above eight dayes. Have put on board the Alligattor Sloopefour chests of good come , being for his use, for which have taken a receipt. Havealso received from him twelv e deale boards , being for Mr Chambers use inforwarding the building. Have made the best shif1wee could to patch up the seavenhand canoe, and comes downe with the sloope, which desire may be mended in allhast, and sent up hither, bein g in much want of her. Pray send by the first a goldcheste, being for the security of the Royall Affrican Companies gould, which willsend you in. 280. Robert Elwes Commenda , 3 Sept. 1687 This comes purposely to desire you that in all hast to send the particulars MrChambers did informe you he should have occasion for, and that in case the sloope cannot be dispatch t in time he desires you will send the carpinter with eight slitt deales, and nailes of six peny and four peny sortte, in a canoe , having such occation for them he cannot proceed any further in the building. The lime is almost worked. All things is well here. I only waite a good occasion or I had sent downewhat gold have taken this month, which is betwixt twenty one and twenty twomarkes. Shall have occas ion for more brandy. Noe news from windward. Desireyou send mee two hundred two pound basons. 281. Robert Elwcs Comenda, 23 Sept. 1687 This morning came down the king of Aguaffo's people to demand his monthlycustome. If any allowed, I desire your order for the payment. They tell me theyhave not been paid for the time Mr Cross lived there. Mr Chambers desires he mayhave an order for to receive twenty five or thirty balks from on board the Mary.Agent Brad ley67 has since Mr Boylstons departure been much indisposed, that he hath not been ashore, neither designs be, but beleive in two or three days will be downe with you in his shipp. No news from windward. Have disposed of the blewperpetuanoes; if you thinke convenient that I may have more from aboard, I desireyour order. 282. Robert Elwes Comenda, 26 Sept. 1687 Yours of the 19 instant have received, and according to your order have sent you the 5 hand canoe. Have received from on board the Mary thirty balks. 68 Wee are in great want of supplies of Jyme, and bricks . Have sent what empty caske were here aboard the Mary , not having any other oppe1tunity to send them downe to you. Wee are in great want of the carpenter, whom wee have expected long since; hope wee may have him by the next. Desire you would send by the next oppertun ity twenty barrels powder. 283. Robert Elwes Commenda, 28 Sept. 1687 Yours of the 27th instant have received , with twenty whole barrells of powder and 10 caske of lime. Have sent all the empty caske on board the Mary, only three which came in the 17 hand canoe. Observe your orders in procuring two hundred chests of com att la. per cheste. 284. Robert Elwes Comenda, 28 Sept. 1687 I had waited on you by soe good au occasion as with Agent Bradly, but it being now the time of trade I could not, so desire you would send those accompts by the return of the boy I sent yesterday and I will rectifie them, or that you please to make mention of the errors and you will oblidge. 285. Robert Elwes Comenda, l Oct. 1687 This is only to desire you to send up a bale of paper brawles, a bale of black or blew baffts. Likewise that you would be pleased to send me an order how to dispose of the English and Ffrench brandy. Mr Chambers desires we may be supplyed with more lime, and bricks. What caske wee bad here, were all send downe by the Mary. Here is no news from windward. Yesterday were in sight three Dutch interlopers, who infonnes us ofnoe Eng lish sbipp being to windward. I des igne to come downe with my accompts if you thinke convenient. 286. Robert Elwes Comenda, 2 Oct. 1687 This is to advise you of the death of Mr Bucknell , who this morning departed his life.69 The news came to me but just now, in what manner or with what distempers he dyed I know not. The Generali of the Mina is expec ted here every minute, being now at Shurna. 70 287. Robert Elwes Comenda, 3 Oct. 1687 Yours of this days instant have received, and according to your order, shall this night goe to Succondee and take a true accompt of all things there, both of the company and what belongs to Mr Thomas Bucknell, which don shall give you an accompt. Observe your order in disposeing of brandy and rum. 288. Thomas Johnson Comenda, 7 Oct. 1687 I begg your pardon in not writing sooner. The reason is I have been ve1y ill this two days, with a feaver, but now thanke God am much better upon recovery. Mr Elwes is not retturned, in the intrim shall take all care necessary. 289. Robert Elwes Comenda, 11 Oct. 1687 Yours of the 10th instant per the 9 hand canoe have received, with one hundred broad blew baffts, two hundred and ffo1ty paper brawl es, and twenty says. Wee are in dayly expectation of the sloop with lime and bricks; hope shee may be dispatcht away in all hast, for what stock we had of both are some time gon. Mr Cross is here and tomorrow designs to be with you, who will give you an accornpt of all passages at Succondee. 71 Mr Walker was well settled there with great respect and civi llity from the Negroes. 72 Am hartyly [sorry) to heare of the death of Agent Bradley. I doe designe to be with you about Satturday and bring my accompts with me. Had don them before had I not been at Succondee. 290. Robert Elwes Comenda, 12 Oct. 1687 This accompanys Mr William Cross, and is to advise you that yesterday on opening a bale of paper brawls mentioned to contain two hundred and fforty pieces, we found ffifty pieces, for which shall give the Royall company creditt for. Have not more to enlarge, designing my self to be with you a Satterday. 291. Robert Elwes Comenda, 21 Oct. 1687 Yours of the 17th instant have received [ with] forty course sleetias, two hundred and thirty six paper brawles, twenty says, ffifty broad black baffts in one hundred ha lfe pieces, and eight whole barrells of powder. Capta in James 73 is very well, and in two or three days designs to be downe. Have sent per this canoe what empty caske shee could conveniently take in, and the other have put on board the Alligator sloop. 292. Robert Elwes Comenda, 30 Oct. 1687 Yours of the 27th instant, with 16 caske of lime and a quantity of bricks, have received, and have putt what empty caske here is on board the Ann Sloop. Herewith comes Mr Chambers, who will give you an accompt of the building. Hope you will retume hjm as soone as possible you can, for without him the slaves will be very careless. Here is at present but little trade, there being much pa llavera in the country, but hope in some few days twill be decided. 293. Robert Elwes Comenda , 5 Nov. 1687 Yours of the 1 1 November have rece ived with tenn caske oflime, and a quantity of bricks. The empty caske are all putt on board the sloop, soe desire you will rettume Mr Chambers, for cannot proceed in the build-ing till such time he comes. Having gon all the first ffiower [= floor] round wee shall have occasio n for the largest of the balkes for joyces for the ffiankers, not being supplyed with timbers from the Negroes. They shall cutt them, butt have not conveniency to bringe them downe , soe that without you will procure leave from the Generali of the the Mina to send a canoe in the River ofShuma, where they now lye ready curt, I know not how wee can be be supplyed . What other occasions are, Mr Chambers can best informe you. Doe desire you would send a caske of rum per next. 294. Robert Elwes Comenda, 5 Nov. 1687 Yours of this instant have received, with another for Captain James, which shall forward to him but heare no advise where he is. Mr Johnson went from hence a Thursday morning, and as yett not returned. Heare not of any news from windward. Inclosed have sent two of my accompts for October , the other shall send with its ballance by the retturne oftbe Mary. Desire you will rettume Noona, who without being sent away , will tary longer then expected. 295. Thomas Johnson Comenda Factory, 5 Nov. 1687 This accompanys the 7 band canoe, wherein have sent all Mr Walkers things sealed up in a cheste, in which you will finde the inventory.74 The money shallbring allonge with me, designing to ffollow to morrow morning. Captain Jamescame into the roade the 2dto take in ballas[t), and on the 3din the evening sayledup to windward, and is just now comeing into the roade againe as wee suppose .Shall at my arrival! at Cabo Corso Castle give your worships a full accompt of ourfurther proceedings. [PS] Inclosed is the key of Mr Walkers chest. 296. Robert Elwes Comcnda, 10 Nov. 1687 This is sent on purpose to desire you to send me up a bale of paper brawlcs, a bale of black or blew bafts, ten barrels of powder, a cask of rum. The Mary went fromTackerada three days agoe, and bound for Axim. Wee heare likewise that thepyrate is here, and bas taken a Dutch interloper which he keeps with him.75 Haveno advise of the Maryes proceedings, or whether the pyrate went from Axim, uponher going up. She is reported to be a shipp of a considerable force, having thirtytwo guns, and six patereroes ,76 and one hunded and fifty men. Wee are in greatwant of Mr Chambers, which if not sick, desire he may come up. 297. Robert Elwes Comcnda , 11 Nov. 1687 Yours of the 10th instant have received, and by the 11 hand canoe have receivedtwo hundred and forty paper brawlcs, ten whole barrels of powder, thirty fourbroad blew bafts, twelve broad black, and sixty seaven gallons rum. Shall employ the slaves, according to your order, in breaking of stones, till such time MrChambers can with conveniency come up. No news from windward. 298. Robert Elwes Comenda , 12 Nov. 1687 This is only to advise you that per information of the Negroes, the Mary isrettumed to Tacherada , but at Axim he melt with the supposed pyrate, firedseverall guns at him, till such time he weighed anchorr, came out and sent his boataboard.77 The Negroes reports that he has a considerable quantity of goods, andlyes at Axim trading, and does design in three days to be at Comenda. Yesterdaywent downe a shipp, newly come upon the Coast, reported to be a Portuguees. Prayinforme whether you please to have any more come put aboard the Mary, for your order was 100chests, and not having them by me so much, he received no more than 84 chests. I have seaventy chests now by me. 299. Robert Elwes Comenda, 16 Nov. 1687 Yours of the 13th instant have received, and according to your order have put aboard the Mary one hundred chests of come, as per his receipts appear. Have also sent you his receipt for the 84 chests formerly delivered him. Likewise my other October accompts, with [ms 'wch'] its ballance, seaven marks, one ounce, six angles and ten taccoes. Acquainted Captain James, that if he pleased to take in come here, he might, but his stay not to be on account of demorage. 78 The Cabusheirs of this place have been with me, and were very earnest to have allowed them one angle on a bendy, or that I should have no trade, but after a great deale of pallavering they were willing to take two angles on a marke, to which I told them I would first advise the Dutch to allow them greater allowances. I desire your answer, for they do detain trade on this account. 300. Robert Elwes Comenda, 18 Nov. 1687 This is to advise you that last night came into the roade the French shipp with her prize, and designs as he sent word to the Dutchman, to be this day ashore. 79 Severall canoes has been aboard, and what they brought ashore are blew perpetuanoes, snaphanses, and brandy. The greatest pai1 of his cargo remayning is brandy and snaphanses and powder. The Dutch have been supplyed with a great many Negroe soldiers from the Mina, likewise at Ampeney the same, imagining the French may setle either here or at Ampeney. If anything happen relating either of them, shall advise you. 301. Robert Elwes Comenda , 21 Nov. 1687 Yours of the 20th instant I have received, and as to the relating of the two Ffrench shipps, l had some discourse with the Comander ashore, who told me that the King ofFfrance had heard that there had been severa ll pyrates that frequented this Coast under French colours, likewise had can-ied off severall Negroes , seaven of which he now brought with him, and hath put them ashore at the place from whence they were pan yard. 80 The reason of his tarrying here to windward is that he expects two great shipps from France of fifty guns each, which were to come out in a !itle time after him. 81 He toucht in at all the places to windward, was ashore at Gambia , and Cherelone, 82 likewise here on the Coast at Axim and the Brandenburghs. He designs, as he told me, to come downe to Cabo Corso in three or four days. Also the reason that he tooke the Dutch interloper was that he found French colours on board him, and severall writings , wherein was the whole concerne of the shipp, all in Ffrench . He put the comander of her ashore at the Branden burghs , and gave him all his goods and gold. The Commander of this French man hath been several! times on this Coast, he gives a good description of Agent Greenhill, also of severall places both to windward and leward. 83 He lyes here to dispose off a considerable quantity of Portuguez tobacco, at 9 lb per angle , brandy at la 4ta per gallon , so that he sells none. The Generali of the Mina has bought seaven ban-els of his wine, of which he brought a fflask asho re, its white wine and not good. 302. Robert Elwes Comenda, 2 Dec. 1687 Hearing of the Frances an-ivall, doe desire you would be pleased to send up two bales of blew perpetuanoes, ten chests of sheets, a bale of black bafts, four hundred of one and two pound basons, one or two cases of sayes. Shall by my next send you my November accounts ballance. Herewith you will receive two accounts and the other shaJI send with its ballance. Am sorry Mr Chambers is not as yett recovered. Wee are like to loose a good season for want him. Just now came into the roade a Brandenburg ship. 303. Robe1t Elwes Comenda, 5 Dec. 1687 This is onely to advise you that the French designes to settle here near us, and on that intent are gone this day up to the King, who by inform ation of John Cabess has granted them leave to settle in the same place wee formerly had, a little within us, and as report goes will tomorrow highst their flagg. 84 Its encroaching on our bounds , soe desire your speedy answeare whether they shall be permitted. John Cabess has been with the King already , who seemes inclin ed to their settling there, but he told the King they should not be permitted till such time wee had advice from you. There are several! places they may settle, and not soe neer us. It would be conven ient to send one Cabush iere here, and with him John Cabess will goe up to the King. It must be done suddaine ly, or the French will have a settling. Tomorrow will dispatch the sloope down to you. 304. Robert Elwes Comenda, 7 Dec. 1687 /8 [sic] Yours of the 3dinstant per Mr Bradshaw 85 I have received, with six hundred and fifty sheets, 200 broad black bafts 25 green and 25 blew perpetuanoes, 400 one pound and 100 four pound pewter basons. Have by this conveyance sent my November baUance, seaven marks, seaven ounces, fifteen angles and three taccooes. Likewise comes my 5 hand canoe, but desire it may be returned , for the seaven hand is soe rotten that it will not swim, and here is not a canoe fitten for use to be had. The Dutch have left this place and are gone all downe to the Mina, taken their goods with them, and lockt up their doore. 86 The French flagg fl.yes at Ampenna, and as the Negroes report will likewise ffly upon the Dutch flagg staff here. The certainty of it shall be better informed per retume of Hansecoe. Monsieur Du Cass has been ashoare severall times and told me that, as he understood this part ofComenda where wee now are is solely the English, that he will not in any respect molest us, but designes neer the Dutch , if not in their very place. Captain Cowley87 I heare is at Cape Tres Pointus, l desire you would send Assina88 here, Captain Noona being dangerously ill and design es this day for Cabo Corsoe. 305. Robert Elwes Comenda, 8 Dec. 1687/8 [sic] This is onely to advise you that the French have setled their factory , about pistoll shott from the Dutch , and have now several! of their people ashoare, to build them for the present a mudbouse. The Dutch collors fly, but they all gone. As yett Haosicoe is not returned from Aguaffo. Have by me about 70 or 80 chest of come. Desire you would send Assina here, Captain Noona being gone sick to Cabo Corsoe. Captain Cowley is at Aquidah. 89 Noe other newes from windward. 306. Robert Elwes Comenda, 9 Dec. 1687/8 [sic] This is onely to advise you that, on opening the chests of sheets, I found two of them all rotten, being damnified with the salt water. The one of them had washt, but however wi ll not sell. Desire you would send me some more sheets, a bale of paper brawles, or if you please that I receive them from Captain Cowley, whome I understand is at Succonde. The French are gone downe to the Mina, 90 have left foure men ashoare here, who are now building them a mudd house. Hansicoe is not yett returned from Aguaffo. If Captain Cowley has any narrow niccannees desire your order that may receive some. 307. Robert Elwes Comenda, 14 Dec. 1687 Yours of the 12 instant per the Ann Sloope have received, with five hund red and twenty sheets, two hundred and forty paper brawles. Have dispatcht the sloope for Succonde. Am now delivering come aboard the Hannah. Noe news from wind.ward. 308. Robert Elwes Comenda , 19 Dec. 1687 This accompanyes Mr Richard Bradshaw, by whome have sent you three receipts for what come have put aboad the Hannnah. Have but little to add. Trnde is here very dead. This morning came into the road Mounsie r Du Cas. 91 Shall at Christmas waite upon you. 309. Robert Elwes Comenda , 22 Dec. 1687 Yours of the 21st instant have received, and according to your order have sent Yankee and the Old man with their masons tooles. Heare noe news from wi.ndward, only that Mr Blinsham and Mr Price are both sick. 92 It is repo1ied here that the Dutch will make warrs with the Aguaffo, and on that purpose have sent to the Adoom country one thousand snaphances with powder and shott, several] says, with other goods to defray their charge, and buy them provition. 93 Likewise Kufroo 94 will be assisting to the Adooms, who [= Kufroo] are very popalus and rish but are hindred to trade. The issue of it wee shall in a short time understand. 95 The French are building now a mud house, but have contracte d with the King of Aguaffo to build a strong fort in a yeares time , which if not are to demand no right or title to settle there, soe that I imagine they have given the King (and as I am informed) thirty marke. 310. Robert Elwes Comenda, 31 Dec. 1687 This comes per returne of the 11 hand canoe, from whome have received one hundred iron barrs. Have sent per this occasion all things belonging to Mr Thomas Johnson. Heare ofnoe newes from windward . All things are here [ms. 'hery'] very well and in good order. 311. Robert Elwes Comenda, l3 Jan. 1687/8 Yours of the 12th instant have received. Relateing to the warrs between Cufferoes and Ambramboes, 96 the first attempted yesterday on the latter, which caused them to fly to Aguaffo but returned the same night with a greate force, soe that the Cufferoes left them. The Fettues 97 had yesterday a small fight with the Cuffe roes, its thought they will not come to a sett fight. The difference between the Cufferoes and Ambramboes were almost decided had not the Generall of the Mina encouraged them [ = the Cufferoes] to proceed in their intend with [ms 'wc h'] the Arnbramboes [and] promised them all the assistance he can to fight Aguaffo, without they will remove the French, whic h is expected every day will be, and that the Generali will make up all pallavers. 98 The King of Aguaffo must be forst to remove them, or will endanger his whole country, which in a day or two shall understand, and you shall have further advice. Shall be careful! of all concernes here. Here are severa ll cornodityes here that are damnified and not fitting for this place, which I will put on board the sloope at her arriva ll, soe that if any danger happens can the sooner put aboard the remaines . As to the damaged goods if you thinke conveinent shall remaine them aboard the sloope and send them downe after that the pallavers are all over. On the arrivall likewise of Captain Batherne 99shall put aboard wha t come I have without contrary orders from you. He is expected down this day, having been at Succonde this five dayes. Mr Griffith has been very ill for three dayes and remaines soe. Here are two French shipps in the roade. 100 312. Robert Elwes Comenda, 13 Jan. 1687/8 This is to advise you that this day the King of Aguaffo has caused the French flagg staff to be stmck and sent aboard. 10 1 Yesterday upon the retume of the Ambramboes to their country, they engaged the Cuffroes, ofwhome was killed a greate many. Captain Batheme is arrived, 102 with one more French shipp. 103 As the warrs encrease shall advise. [PSJ If you can spare me a flagg desire you would send itt per first. 313. Robert Elwes Comenda , l 5 Jan. 1687 / 8 This is to advise you that have put on board the Adventure sloope all things belonging to the Royall African Company, the powder and come only excepted. 104 The come I had designed to had put on board Captain Batherne, who promised last night to send his long boate for it, but is this morning turnd to windward. John Cabess and Cabushiers have sent all their effects from hence, tho I hope all pallavers will be decided, for Taggee, who is now with Abonadoe , 105 its thought will retume to his owne croome, which done the differences wil I be soone over. This Tagge is all one as Aben at Annamaboe, 106 who[ = Tagge] relying on the Cufferoes and Abonadoe was in hopes to conquer Aguaffo. Mr Griffith being very ill comes downe. 314. Robert Elwes Comenda, 21 Jan. 1687/8 This morning came the Cabushiers and would have had me to trust them some powder and lead barrs which I denied, telling them that the king had received both from you. However they would not be satisfied till I writt you to be informed if you be pleased to order any from me, or to Jett them have it [at] Cabo Corsoe. 315. Robert Elwes Comenda, 23 Jan. 1687/8 Since the difference between the Mina and the Fetera[s] people , ofwhome were panyard several!, the French have been at Aguaffo, and are againe entertained here at Comenda, giving the Cabushiers here in mony and goods forty bendys. 107 The Fetera, who in all this pallaver has been much for the Dutch, is now of the contrary, insoemuch as I question whether they may have a settling here more . The Ki.ng of Aguaffo has proffered the Dutch house to the French, which they denied. You have [heard] that the French Factory was sett on ffire by a Dutch slave. 108 As to relating to the warrs, I understand the King is in the ffeild with all his army, but have as yett made noe flight. The Cufferoes and Umbramboes [sic: = Abramboes] have made severall attempts, in which was a greate many killed on both sides. Have received several] messengers from the King to advise me to send of all my goods aboard, which accordingly I have done, only three barrells and a halfe of powder. Yesterday went downe to the Mina a pr ize which they [i.e. the Dutch] tooke to windward. 316. Robert Elwes Comenda, 23 Jan. 1687/8 Yours of the 22th instant have received, and according to your order comes downe the 9 hand canoe. The Cabushiers have not as yett been with me, which when they come shall infonne them of what you write. I have but little knewes concerning the warrs, here being noe body to informe me. I desire if Noona be well, be may retume. The French are now setted at Brawtons house in the towne. 109 Monsieur Du Cas lyes here only to recover his debts, which I understand are considerable, upwards of seaventy bendyes, of which I beleive he will not this voyage receive any. 1I0 Wee having a greate many working slaves doe desire to know whether you please to have them come downe, till such time the pallaver in the countty be over, or that they remaine here. 317. Robert Elwes Comenda, 31 Jan. 1687 /8 This is one ly to advise you that yesterday the King of Aguaffo sent me downe word to take the Companys goods ashoare, that there was noe warrs in bis country but all quietness and pease, soe desire to know whether you thinke it conveinent as yett to remove them. Desire you would by the ffirst oppertunity send Captain Noona up. Noe newes from windward. The Wassawes has lately defeated the Adoomes. 111 There is noe trade stirring. 318. Robert Elwes Comenda , 2 Feb. 1687/8 Yours of the l 51 instant have received, and this day shall be put aboard what come I have. By this comes all the slaves , only six, four men , two weomen. Mr Price by reason of his indisposition came downe with the Elizabeth but is something better recovered, doe desire that you would be soe kind as to admitt of his tarrying with me , being alone , Succondee not agreeing to his health , Shall obser ve your orders in not taking the Companyes goods ashoare till I heare further from you. 319. Thomas Price Comenda , 2 Feb. 1687/8 Finding my selfe ill with an ague and favor , was forced to come downe with Captain Batheme , he having a Doctor on board , by whose helpe and assi stance I have recovered part of my strength. Succondee agrees not at all with my health , for I am continually ill. I have not, nor have not had any of the Royall African Companys concemes in my custody since I was last at Cabo Corsoe. Captain Bathernes time is to farr spent, I can not goe in him , soe I humbly desire I may be with Mr Elwes he standing in greate need of assistance, ti II it may please you to dispose of me otherwise or time may serve I can dispose of my selfe. 320. Robert Elwes Comenda , 5 Feb. 1687/ 8 Herewith you will receive Captain Batbemes receipts for come, and two men slaves. Also my December accounts, the ballance have already delivered you. My January accounts you shall receive by my next , its ballance but very small. Its reported that the Generali of the Mina designes to goe for Shuma , and carry with him a greate forc e to assist Abo zanadoe [sic] and Tagge , of the truth ofit you may be better informed than I am. The Cabushiers have been with me every day on their old pallaver to b01Tow powder , soe that not to be troubled with them, have lent halfe a barrell. 321. Robert Elwes Comenda , 8 Feb. 1687/8 This comes purposely to advise you that there is in the roade a Dutch shipp from the Mina , lyes near the sboare and has this day fired two greate shott over the twone [= towne]. Here is also fifty or sixty small canooes who will not suffer any canoe to goe of,112 and this morning had not Mr Bayly gott aboard the Dutch shipp he had by those canoes been cutt to peeces before he had gott aboard his sloope. After the retume of the canoes to the Mina , who are tomorrow expected againe , Mr Bayly went aboard the shipp, and examined the full reason of the Blacks attempt, who told him that he could not hinder what they had done, or may doe. Mr Bayly being in greate want of water, I desire you would order some meanes how he may send ashoare , and that I may have a free passage in case of any disturbance to send aboard the sloope. 322. Robert Elwes Comenda, 11 Feb. 1687/8 Yours of the 10th instan t have received and returne you thanks for your kindness. I hope the pallaver will soon be decided, understanding it tis the King of Aguaffos inclination to remove the French, who [i.e. the king] on that intent sent for the Cheife 113 yesterday to come up to him, but being sick he did not. Its thought he will have him up with him, that he may the better make up the difference with the Generali of the Mina. The shipp continues here yett and fires every day six or seven great gunns over the towne , and will not suffer any canoe to goe off without a white man in it. Upon sending the powder aboa rd one of the barrells hoopes was all broake , so have ordered Mr Bayly to make use of it as he finds occasion , or to deliver it ashoare at Cabo Corso Castle. 114 Herew ith you will receive my January accounts, the gold is on board the Sloope. 323. Robert Elwes Comenda, 17 Feb. 1687/8 Not having heard lately from Cabo Corso Castle, this is onely to be infonned where [= whether] you please as yett to have the goods be brought ashoare, not understanding of any pallaver here at Comenda, in which you are better advi sed then I can be, for I have noe body to informe me. Have had some time since adv ice ofNoonas com ing up, who probably may be expected to be here , but as yett is not come, soe desire you would hast him, that therein 1 may the better informe you of all transactions , which at present I cannot, John Cabess not coming near me. Yesterday passed by the Alligator Sloope. Captain Buttram I heare is at Taccaradoe but designes to windward. 324. Robert Elwes Comenda, 19 Feb. 1687/8 This is to advise you that yesterday the French were removed from hence , but their goods detaind by the Negroes. 115 Its likewise reported that tomonow the Generall of the Mina will send a Factor here, the King of Aguaffo having given him sufficient pawn for their security, and the Generall to gratifie him, hath given him two hundred and fifty bendyes in good gold. This information I have from John Cabess and Cabushiers. You formerly promised me a flagg, I desire you would send it. The French shipp who is now gon downe, 116 informed us of two English shipps, the one a friggott, the other a pink, at Cape Lahoo. 1 17 325. Robert Elwes Comenda, 24 Feb. 1687/8 This is only to advise you that yesterday Mr Griffith was taken with a convulsion fitt, which lasted him severall houres, and rema ins in so bad a condition, that dare not send him downe, so I desire, if you can give him any releif, you would be pleased to disptach it in all hast. Captain Buttram I hear is gon up to Ashinee. 326. Robert Elwes Comenda, 11 March 1687/ 8 This evening the King sent down to me, to lend him seaven barrels of powder, and in case I had none, to send to you, so thought more convenient to deny him, and referr it to your selves, likewise I have not that quantity, which ifl had I could not doe without your order, which I advised him, also telling him that he had been supplyed already from Cabo Corso. It is reported here that the Bendefoes 118 have encountered the Cuferas this day. 327. Robe1t Elwes Comenda, 12 March 1687/ 8 This is to advise you of the arrivall of Captain Barrott, who this evening came to an anchor here. The bearer hereof being indisposed, and desired leave to come downe. There is another English shipp at Dickiscove. 328. Robett Elwes Comenda, 14 March 1687 /8 Yours of the 13th instant have received, with ten barrels of powder. Observe your orders for the intrusting the King of Aguaffo with five of them, shall endeavour to get what security I can for them, and to dispose oftbe rest, according to your order. By Mr Ronan you will receive my February accompts with its ballance, two ounces, eleaven angles. Have not more to enlarge, referring all windward news to Mr Ronan, who comes with the same conveya nce. 329. Robert Elwes Comenda, 21 March 1687/8 Having this conveniency by a Cabo Corso canoe, it is to advise you that Mr Bayly , who by reason of bad weather has broke two cables , and besides his pump very bad, which if should given way, [he] must come downe, and so thought convenient to infonne you of it beforehand. Three or four days since the King of Aguaffo sent a pawne for ten banels of powder, but it not being all good gold, I spared him but four banells , till such time he brought another that is good, wh ich he promised to do, and to receive the powder at 1oz 4a per bane!!. Am advised of three French men ofwarr to windward, and that they have taken a Dutch Companys sbipp. Hear nothing of Captain Lomax nor Captain Bridges, only that the French shipp some time since gon downe spoke with the latter in the road of Sestos. 330. Robert Elwes Comenda, 24 March 1687/8 Inclosed is a letter from Mr Blinsham, which came just now to hand. 119 Prov itions being very scarce, I desire you would be so kind as to spare me a litle beefe, for I cannot get ffish nor fowles for money nor any thing elce without paying double the price. It would be very convenient to have the slaves returne here for a title time, to provide thatch and wood to cover the Fort , for what people I have neither know how to do it, and besides are too few. It has been formerly thatcht, but Mr Chambers knows its all broke to peeces, and lost, expecting it might be finisht this season, so did not take any care of preserving the thatch. This comes by a canoe, not on purpose but bound downe on his owne account. 331. Robert Elwes Comenda, Ultimo March 1688 According to your order have put aboard the Ann sloop, all the merchandizes and materialls belonging to the Factory of Comenda, which were before aboard the Adventure sloop. He being ordered up with the Alligator to Succondee, are now both on their voyage. Captain Lomax is here, and by his owne discourse, designes to remayne eight days. No trade stining , and but little news concerning the warrs . The King of Aguaffo has ordered the French flagg to fly on the Dutch flagg staff, which accord ingly does. 120 By this canoe you will receive one of the working slaves, who instead of working for the factory, makes it his buisness to fetch wood for the towne, so desire another in his place. By the next shall send my accompts. 332. Robe rt Elwes Comenda, 6 April 1688 This accompanys my March accompt with its ballaance , five angles and five taccoes . Captain Bridges is in the roade I suppose , but the seas being so bad, there has not been a canoe on board him, neither any from him a shoare. Have made the eight barrels powder, which are delivered the King upon pawns, remayning till such time he redeems them, and then will give the company credit for them. Here is not any trade stirring, neither can I understand any discourse of their proceed .ings against the Cufferaes. Abonadoe I heare is very ill with severall paines in his bones occasioned by his debauchary. Have write you some time since concerning sending the slaves here to provide wood and thatch for the covering of the building, the sooner you could sent them the better , for wee have had a great deale of raine already and no question but may have much more, which must needs be prejudicial!. 333. Robert Elwes Comenda, 17 April 1688 Yesterday the King and Petera sent downe to me for powder, but not having any I gave them a letter to you, which was stopt by the Mina canoemen , and returned hithe r, so this day I send away my owne five hand canoe, and desire you would be pleased to send up ten barrels of powder. The Fetera sends downe two men to remayne as pawns, 12 1 which if you please to Jett them remayne with you, I can deliver them two of them you sent up to me. I desire you would dispatch the canoe this night. [PS] I send my flag in the canoe, that the Mina may not molest her, as she passed. 334. Robert Elwes Comenda roade, 18 April 1688 Yours have received, and shall according as I see occasion receive what powder you order Captain Bridges to deliver me. You have heard that the Great Patera is defeated, and by its means it is thought Aguaffo will be worsted, though as yet wee have no ill news from the King, but that he bas fougb.t stoutly. It is reported the Litle Patera has routed the Cuferas. The enemies have taken and burnt all the upper croomes, but as yet have not attempted our parts here. Ampenny is all burnt by the Mina people. The Great Fatera is now aboard Captain Bridg es, with as many more Blacks as she can conveniently receive, likewise the sloop full. I have secured the Royall Affrican Companys concernes, the brandy excepted, which is ashore, and cannot get people to bring it off, for as I send the great canoe ashore, the natives force themselves into her, and come off. 122 [PS] This accompanies the Great Fatera. 