IV FREDERICKSBURG Fort Fredericksburg, east of Cape Coast Castle (and like the latter, situate d within the kingdom of Fetu) was 01iginally tbe headquarters of the Danish African Company (Frederixborg), but had been pawned to the RAC by its commandant in 1684, and taken over by the English company in the following year. 1 The Danish company disputed the validity of the transfer , and negotiated to recover the factory: two letters from the Danish Director-General to the Chief Agents of the RAC relating to tbe issue, written in 1687, are included elsewhere in this corpus (nos 997-8). In the end , however, in 1688 the Danes agreed to give up their claim to Fredericksburg, in return for further payment; it remained in English hands thereafter, and became known as Fort Royal . Although it had been in English hands since I 685, no correspondence from Fredericksburg is preserved until September 1687, when Ralph Hassell was transferred from Anomabu to take over there.2 Although Fredericksburg did some trading for gold (and once, slaves), as reported in this correspondence, its principal value to the RAC was strategic rather than commercial , since it overlooked and commanded Cape Coast Castie.3 335. Ralph Hassell Frederickburge, 6 Sept. 1687 Here is a man that would have two bendys worth of three pound pewter basons . l told him here was none, and not soe many at Caboe Cor oe. Whatt there is that is good, pray spare, with some lead barrs if any. Have not as yett had an inquiry butt for two tapseiles ; the money being verry badd, refused itt. 336. Ralph Hassell Frederickburge, 9 Sept. 1687 I have received yours, to gather with a caske of rum containing fifty eight ga lions and fifty lead barrs, which shall give the Royall Affrican Company creditt for accordingly and endeavor the saile thereof. 337. Ralph Hassell Fredericksbu rg, 12 Sept. 1687 Pray be pleased to send me on account of the Royall Affrican Compa ny of England one hundred iron barrs. Fredricksburge, 15 Sept. J687338. Ralph Hassell Accordi ng to your order have sent you all the red perpetuanoes , which is twenty eight and a halfe. Yesterday I tookc them all out of the fillits, 4 being very full of moths , and brusht and aired them. Yeste rday I received the hundred iron barrs, and have give n the Royall Affrican Company credditt for them. 339. Ralph Hasse ll Fredricksburge , 20 Sept. 1687 I request the ffavour to send if possible to be spared two chests or more of sheets , one bale of blew perpetuanoes and twenty halfe ffirkins of tallow, here being people to buy these goods or at least that enquir for them. 340. Ralph Hasse ll Fredriekbu rge, 22 Sept. 1687 I have send downe one iron barr to be wrought into lincb pins, worrnes, nailes and spikes for the use of the Fort. Intreat you that the smith may worke it, being wanting. The bearer hath also a noate of some other things which hee stands in need of. Fredricksburgh, 22 Sept. 1687341. Ralph Hassell I pray send on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England , two chests of sheets, money being in the scales for them. Fredricksburge, 23 Sept. 1687342. Ralph Hassell Since the last I write I had received one hundred iron barrs, I have received more for the Royall Affrican Company accompt , vizt on the 20th instant twenty five blew perpetuanoes in one bale, one hundred and thirty sheets in two chests; on the 21th twenty halfe firkins tallow, and this day one hundred ninety five sheets in three chests, one hundred paper brawles in a case, for all which goods I have given the Royall Affrican Company credditt. 343. Ralph Hassell Fredrickburgh , 3 Oct. 1687 Pray be pleased to send me if you have any, one case ofGuynea stuffs , alsoe , six barrells of powder, and six chests of sheets. Here is a man bound to Morea,5 which came from the Mina, which tells me the Dutch has taken the ffactory at Oquadah ,6 belonging to the Brandenburgh, and brought all their men to the Mina, 7 and alsoe has taken one of the interlopers boates , and seaven men. 344. Ralph Hassell Fredrickburgh , 4 Oct. 1687 I have here inclosed sent four accompts for the month September. Have this day received six barrells of powder and five chests of sheets . Pray send your bale of Guynea stuffs by this bearer. 345. Ralph Hassell Fredrick burgh, 4 Oct. 1687 Pray be pleased to send me a caske of knives, having received money for some of them. 346. [unsigned] Fredricksburgh Fort, 3 Nov. 1687 I have here inclosed sent you four accompts for October. If there be any error after examination it shall be corrected. 347. Ralph Hassell Fredrickburgh, 8 Nov. 1687 Pray be pleased to spare me five chests of sheets . I have sold all I had , and have money for more. I have sent men for them. 348. Ralph Hassell Fredricksburgh ffort, 16 Nov . 1687 I have taken money for four chests of sheets , some knives, and paper brawl es, so humbly request, if possible , four chests of sheets, a caske of knives, and a bale of brawles. The people wait for the goods. If cannot be supplied, may returne them their money. Have sent people for the goods. 349. Ralph Hassell Fredricksburgh, 2 Dec. 1687 Pray be pleased to send me on accompt of the Royall African Company of England six chests of sheets, two bales of blew perpetuanoes , and two casks of knives. For each of these sorts of goods have some monys. Fredricksburg, 17 Dec. 1687350. Ralph Hassell Theave sent down slaves, and request one hundred iron barrs and six barrells of good powder. This morning opening a barrelJ of powder, find it not fitt for sayle, nor for use, soe have sent it downe, and pray another in liew thereof. 351. Ralph Hassell Fredricksburgh, 4 April 1688 Pray be pleased to send me, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company, one caske of knives, here being customers for some, and they like not them which I have. 352. Ralph Hasse ll Fredricksburgh, 13 April 1688 Pray be pleased to send me a caske or two of knives more, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England, for which shall give creddit accordingly, here being customers for more than what I have. 