V ANASHAN The RAC's factory at Anashan ('Annishan'), in the kingdom of Fante, east of Fetu, had been abandoned in 1682.1 It was apparently briefly reoccupied during 1684-5, 2 but had evidently been again withdrawn by the time the Rawlinson correspondence resumes in January 1686. Although there was some discussion of re-settling the Anashan factory in April 1687 (no.517), nothing was immeiliately done to effect this. In November of the same year, however, when it appeared that the French might establish themselves at Anashan, the RAC sent a man to resume possession of its factory there (no.569). The Anashan factory supplied gold and com for the provisioning of slave ships, and some :firewood; there is one a Uusion in this correspondence to trade in slaves (no.368). The principal hinterland traders coming to Anashan, as to Komenda, were the Akani. 353. John Bloome Annisban, 19 Dec. 1687 Attmy arrivall I inspected the Factory in part, and find that wee have occasion ofa carpenter to make us severall necessaryes, vizt foure doores, two windowes and foure shutters, with severall other conveniences, which I cannot expresse. The warehouse has naer a dore, nor conveniences to lay goods upon, therefore be pleased to dispatch us necessaryes as soone as possible. Here are several[ Arcany men who have brought good sumes in gold, and doe want perticularly sheets, iron barrs, lead barrs, powder, carabines, pewter of all sorts, paper brawles, tallow, says, rum, boysadoes, &ca, of each sort of which you may be pleased to send us a quantity. I wont neglect to put the Factory into an imeadiate capacity of receiving all things necessary, therefore be pleased to dispatch us a carpenter to assist us in our wants. Pray send us some pewter juggs , for the people doe aske for them. You may also send other goods which you may thin.lee conveinent. This is what at present I can infonne you, but hope to make new discoveries and shall advise you. 354. John Bloome Annishan, 22 Dec . 1687 thI wrote you the 19instant , a little after my arrival I,I then Jett you know the greate occasion wee should have for a carpenter to make doores , windowes, &ca, but for thatching and mending of our walls, wee are working with all dilligence. The Arcanee men are gone up to the country but doe promise to be downe againe very speedily. I wish wee had some of their mony before their departure. I hope to have a good trade when goods come. 355. John Bloome Annishan, 28 Dec . 1687 I wrote you the 23d [sic] currant per John Teague , to which referr you. Wee have since put all our roomes in a posture to receive goods, and therefore desire you would be pleased to dispatch us the carpent ers worke and goods as soone as you thinke convenient. Heres one of the Arcanee Captains in towne, who stays till our goods come, and then retum es to informe the Cheife Captain 3 of our settlement. He says that as soone as the traders hear that goods are come down e, they will be speedily with us. This l thought convenient to informe you. 356. John Bloome Annishan, 3 Jan. 1687/8 My last was per the Frances boate, since which have none from you . The Blacks are impatient to see goods come, and begin to be discontent, and say th.at the Englis h dont intend to sett le the Factory, therefore if the French do come they say they shall be very welcome. This Captain Coffee tells me , which I thought not amiss to advise you. Here are some Arcanyes in towne have brought mony, but if our goods dont come today they'! be begon to Morea, but I hope before night wee shall have wherewi thall to satisfie them. I have gott the Captain of the Arcanies to perswade them to stay till to morrow night , upon full assurance of goods for their purpose. 357. John Bloome Annishan, 4 Jan. 1087 /8 I have received per the eleven hand canoe one hundred iron barrs, two cases of sletias course, one cask of rum, and one punsion [= puncheon], the contents of which is unknown to me, but tomorrow I shall examine and advise you further. It being late and the canoes ready to goe off, wee have not time to doe it tonight. 358. John Bloome Annishan, 5 Jan. 1687/8 I wrote you two or three lines last night per the 11 hand canoe, and doe expect another canoe today, according to what you wrote me, and then shall write you more amply. Having this oppertunity and it coming into my mind, I thought fitt to desire you would be pleased to speake to Captain Cowley for his weights and scales &ca. Ifl could have bought any, I would not have put you to this trouble, for which I beg your pardon. The Blacks are something better satisfied then they were the other day, and altho the goods they most desire are not yett come, I have agai ne obliged them to stay, but with much adoe . I am expecting another canoe. 359. John Bloome Annishan , 5 Jan. 1687/8 Yours of the instant I have per the 11hand canoe with five chest of sheets, two caske with pewter , one case oftapseiles, forty halfe firkins of tallow and fifty lead barrs , and yesterday I received two cases of course sletias, thirteen screwed juggs , one hundred iron barrs and one cask of rum, all on accompt of the Royall African Company of England. Perpetuauoes, sayes, boysados, powder , paper brawles, and Guynea stuffs would sell and are demanded very much, you may be pleased to send some if you thinke conveinent. Wee shall dispatch the carpenter as soon as possible. He has brought us noe locks, but 1 have by hazard three padlocks which must serve until\ wee can be better fumist. Wee want 3 haspe and staples to hang our padlocks, which please to send us as soone as possible. Our come roome is ready , therefore when you please to give your orders, they shall be punctually observed . 360. John Bloome Annishan , 9 Jan . 1687/8 My last was the 5th currant , since which have none from you. Wee have since opened the caske of pewter basons no. 299,302, and find that they containe each 200 one pound basons , as you did advise. I hope you will be pleased to send some perpetuanoes , says, boysados , powder, paper brawles and Guynea stuffs, soe that wee may be furnist upon occasion. I have given my receipt to Mr James Nightingale,4 for five green and five blew perpetuanoes (of which wee have but two green remaining) , ten sletias course and thirty two Guynea stuffs , of which twenty one disposed, the rest are damaged. I have disposed three chests of sheets, the rest noe doubt will be goo very speedily. l desire you would be pleased to remember Captain Cowley for his weights . &ca. Tomorrow shall dispatch the carpenter, and expect your orders, for the buying of come. 361. John Bloome Annishan, 13 Jan. 1687/8 I have the honor of yours of this instant with 12 blew perpetuanoe s, four green and foure redd ditto , one caske containing fifty foure pound pewter basons, four whole barrells of powder, and twelve cases of spirritts, all on accompt of the Royall African Company of England. According to your order I shall purchase two hundred chest of come , and shall take all care possible to preserve it from the wevell. I thanke you humbly for sending me a man that may be soe necessary to me. Your letter for Mr Nightingale I sent away on arrival!. I hope you have Captain Cowleys weights &ca, but suppose you have forgott to send them by this canoe. The Cabushiers of this place came this morning for their custome (as they call it), which they say is one ankor of rum and one say. I desire you would be pleased to give me your resolution in this matter. Mr Nightingale may know some thing of itt, therefore have writt to him to be informed. I have received 12 cases of spirritts, but you mention but ten in the letter. Annishan, 14 Jan. 1687/8 362. John Bloome l write to you yesterday per the canoe that brought some goods, to which referr you. MrNightingale writes me that he knowes not the custome that the Cabushiers used to be allowed , therefore I referr myselfe to you. This goes per Herbert Currie, who was sent hither by Mr Nightingale. Annishan , l OFeb. 1687 /8 363. John Bloome Our Cabushiers are not content with 3 cases of spinitts, they would perswade me to beleeve that they were allowed two Welch plaines in Mr Prices time, 5 and desire to have the value of an ounce in some other goods. Therefo re when you please to order it shall be observed by [JB]. Annishan, 20 Feb. 1687/8 364. John Bloome Captain Batherne told me that he would leave his weights, scales &ca with you, therefore this is to desire you would be pleased to remember him of his promise. When you thinke fitt to send slaves please to send us men slaves, for a woman wont at all be necessary to us. I begg your pardon for the trouble. Anoishan, 2 March 1687 /8 365. John Bloome I send you per David Silverwood my monthly accompts and for ballance thereof two marks , one ounce, three angles and six taccooes, which you may please to receive, and pass to my credditt. If you please to send me some says, perpetuanoes, Guinea clouts and other goods, for the purchasing of come , would do very well. The slaves, weights, and scales &ca., if you have them, would be a greate supply to me, I refer myself to your bounty. 366. John Bloome Annishan , 7 March 1687/8 I have received per the nine hand canoe ten sayes, ten boysadoes , twenty five blew perpetuanoes and twenty five green ditto, on accompt' of the Royall African Company of England . Please to procure me weights, scales, blow panns and sifters, 6 for I am at a greate loss for want thereof. What concemes the Factory shall be dilligently observed. 367. John Bloome Annishan , 8 March 1687/8 In my letter yesterday I had forgott to desire you to send us some iron barrs and gingham clouts, of all which wee have none. 368. John Bloome Annishan , 13 March 1687/8 I have received per the 9 hand canoe, eighty iron barrs, and ninety six gallons of rum, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. If at any time you send a canoe this way, please to send me some gunpowder. According to your order have sent up Daniell Silverwood. He's a quiet sober man, I wish the other may prove so. [PS] Just now I have bought a man slave, which I send per the 9 band canoe. 369. John Bloome Annishan, I 6 March 1687/8 This is to desire you would be pleased to order the takeing of fifty chests of corn from this place as so one as you judge it neccessary, for our come room is very little and wont hold much more convenienttly , and if come comes in plentyfully upon me I shall be at a loss for want of stowidge . 370. John Bloome Annishan, 16 March 1687/8 Just now I have received yours and accordingly have dispatched the canoe to Captain Buttram.7 The news wee have here informes me that the biggest of the two is a French man,8 the other a Portuguez, but I shall endeavor to informe my selfe better, and if l discover any thing shall advise you and Captain Buttram. 371. John Bloome Annishan, 17 March 1687/8 Yesterday I sent a canoe off to the French man to discover what he might be, but they would not suffer the Blacks to go aboard, not upon offer to trade with them. This morning I sent againe, and the Blacks had admittance, but not to come nigh the cabin door, which was guarded with two musquittes, a thing not usual! on board honest merchant men, nor will they sell any goods for gold, but offer to barter for slaves. Those circumstances do perswade me that he is a rogue, and I have given Captain Buttram notice of it, by returne of the message. I understand that you have sent 20 men to his assistance, which 1am glad off, for he cannot be too secure. If you please to give me any instructions they shall be duly observed. 372. John Bloome Annishan, 18 March 1687/8 I have received yours of this instant. The French man is sayld too leward, and I hope will not trouble any of the Royall Companyes shipps. If you please to send me some powder, here are traders will buy it out of hand. 373. William Ronan 9 Annishan, 5 April 1688 I have according to your orders sent Mr Whiting 10 a copy of the inclosed. Captain Barratt parted yesterday. Annamabo e inventory is signed, noe ballance due to the Company by the aceompt finished before the warehouse was opened, but by his other accompts he sayes there will, theye are not made up as yett. Ther's noe come at all but is dayly in expectation, as f suppose he writt you. 11 Agga inventory and Annishan likewise have done, there aecompts are not as yett made up. By tomorrow night, I j udge l may be re'dy to waite on you at Cabo Corsoe. I shall give you a farther accompt at [sic] of my proceedings on my arrival!. 374. John Bloome Annishan, 7 April 1688 I send you per Mr William Ronan my monthly accompts, and for ballance thereof one marke, four ounces and three taccoes. Be pleased to send me some powder, Guinea clouts, sheets, fifty iron barrs, all which are in request, and a few allejarrs, for a tryall. Come is scarce, what intrigue the Blacks have to keep it is a mistery to me. I hope you have got weights and scales, &ca, of which I have great occasion . 375. John Bloome Annishan , 9 April 1688 I have received yours of this instant, per the 9 hand canoe, per whom have received fifty iron barrs, two hundred and sixty sheets, and twenty five allejarrs , on accompl of the Royall Affrican Company ofEngland. Ifl find an occasion to baiter powder for 16 chests of come , shall advise you, but hitherto the Arcanies have generally demanded it. The Corranrier 12 presseth for a say, he has sent here dozen times, but I am resolved to do nothing without your order. I shall endeavour to purchase all the come possible, but I find it comes but very slowly. I have about forty chests, and no more, but I hope to have more ere long. Captain Buttram and Captain Sturt told me they had left their weights and scales at Cabo Corso. 376. John Bloome Annishan , 13 April 1688 This is to desire you would be pleased to send us some blew and green perpetuanoes, of which wee have occasion. Be pleased to order the next shipp that comes downe to take what come wee have by us. In the meantime, I shall purchase all I can. 377. John Bloome Annishan , 14 Apri l 1688 I have received yours of the 13th currant per the 7 hand canoe with 3 bales containing seaventy five perpetuanoes blew, and one bale containing twenty five ditto green, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. I have also received scales, weights, and the things thereunto belonging , mentioned at the foot of your letter. 378. John Bloome Annisban, 19 April 1688 This is to desire you would be pleased to send us eight or ten chests of sheets, and a few home halfted knives, I would not have too many, least they rust on our hands. The Captain of Arcanies expects tomorrow people to buy the aforesaid comodi .tyes. He would have a sallary settled upon him, to that I could say nothing , but have promised him the same priviledge that they have at Agga. He has brought us five or six marks, since a few days, and I beleive may do very well for our Factory . Be pleased to let me have your order about the Corrantier, for he is very importunate. 379. John Bloome Annishan, 20 April 1688 I have received yours of this instant , with eight chests containing 520 sheets, and ninety dozen of home halft ed knives, per content, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. As to the Captain of the Arcanies and Corrantier, J referr myself to your next, but the surest way (in my opinion) will be to allow him so much per marke, for having a sallary setled on him may cause him to carry his trade another way. 380. John Bloome Annishan, 24 April 1688 This is to advise you that the Arcanies are now in towne, and would buy about two hundred perpetuanoes blew, therefore I desire you would be pleased to supply us, for I have not above fifty by me, if you can possibly send them to night , or to mo1Tow morning at the farthest. If you please to send some trusty person , Ile send you nine marks of gold per retume of the canoe. 381. John Bloome Annishan, 26 April 1688 I have according to my promiss and your order delivered to Mr Robert Elwes 13 sixteen marks of gold, being what at present by me. As to the Captain of Arcanies and Corrantierr I referr my selfe to your next. In the mean time the Captain requires an angle upon a marke, which I pay him, as he brings his money. I shall continue to encourage a trade, as I have don, and hope it prove as good or better hereafter. I have received per the 9 hand canoe, eight bales containing one hundred and fifty blew, and fifty green perpetuanoes on accompt Royall Affrican Company of England . 