490. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 11 Jan. 1686/7 Just now came down Boneshee from Fanteen , being sent from the Braffo and Curranters, hereing that the Ackims and Aguinas are comeing upon them,52 they say they want powder to fight them, and have sent to be trusted with four barrells of powder and one ounce in lead barrs , and say they will pay out of their monthly customes, and if they are conquer[er]s in slaves. I will not doe it ofmyselfe but by your order, so beg your immediate answers, and a supply of more powder. I am constraind upon your[= their] great importunity to write this. Nothing of trade presents, they being all up the cuntrey. Pray send no powder except you intend to trust them. I have delivered 4 sayes to have com in eight dayes for them, being baited almost to death to doe it. 491. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 11 Jan. 1686/7 Yours with my December accounts have received, which are sent down to be rectified according as you write at the foot of the letter, which I will not be s-0 prophane as to call the God of truth to be wittness to a lye, but this I will aver that for me or to my knowledg they are the same goods as formerly I received for broad nicconees, no more nor no less nor otherwise to my k11owledg without any equivocation or mentall preservation [= reservation] , and this I will aver as God shall be my help; and if you think I doe with any fraud endeavour to put an injury upon any man, I averr I have no such thought nor intention, and Jett the saddle be laid on the right horse , I received them so. Pardon me writeing so bluntly, but it is nothing but truth, which I will aver before the Almighty to whom I appeal. I also perceive that since the 6th December one broad nicconee is wanting of what was then mentioned, so there may be mistakes in the best of men. I have sent the account back againe arid beg a more favorable judgment and not such seveire sentence on the innocent to that conceme. This afftemoon I have taken in sixty chests of com which I have not paid for, and tomorrow and affterwards shall have more, but not to be had under l.a per chest, which they say is the usual! rate, or 11 chest for a say &ca pro rato. Not a cracra stirring. It is the generall fear of all this cuntrey, nay an undoubted truth that the Achims with the Anguinas are goeing to fight the Accrongs , which these people are to protect, 53 and Ahenesah will undoubtedly be on the back of the Achims to help Fanteen. 54 We hope it will be a good time shortly for slaves. The com that 1 shall have within this three or four dayes, with the corn I bad from Mr Nigh tingale s, I hope to make it betwixt 400 or 500 chests. 492. William Halford Annamaboe, 15 Jan. 1686/7 I have here inclosed an inventory oftbe warehouse and I have take all the possible care I could in laying up the goods so that they may not take any more damage, so I shall use my utmost endeavour to keep alll the goods neat and. clean wl1ich I receive from Cabo Corso. 493. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 15 Jan. 1686/7 These serve for covert of the accounts for Agga till such time that Mr Elwes took charge. They should have been sent up sooner but I tarried till I had received the ballance, which I received at three times, and have sent it up, being 6a 13ta. Also I have inclosed the accounts which were sent to be coppied over, but not that which Jonas signd, for that I reserve for my seife without you are pleased to have that. (As] to com (it] comes in but slowly either here or at Agga. I have not in all received above one hundred and twenty chests and I beleive Mr Elwes none, for the news of war and preparation thereto hath so allarmed this town that they are all gon to Fanteen except it be the ffishermen, women and children. Here is not 50 fighting men in Annamabo and all the adjacent crooms , and till such time as they return cannot expect any corn. I beleive shall not take so much mony this month as will sattis:fie charges. I purpose today to goe to Annishan and agree for two or 300 chests and so to have it sent ofto the ship that shall next come, ifit stands with your approbation, pray by return oftbe messenger a word, but I woul d willingly have the old com aboard first, for if be has the new com he '! hardly take the old and when that is goo I shall have roome enough for 1000 chests more, for I dare not mix new with old. 494. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 17 Jan. 1686/7 I received yours of this dayes date while I was at Annishan measureing the com , where I am promised 3 or 400 chests of com. I have left Henry Underhill there to measure it and with all have given order to receive whatever good com they bring tomorrow and next day. I have exactly three hundred and forty chests here with Mr Nightingales come, which I hope you will order to be shipt first. I have now also sent a note to Mr Elwes to se what corn he has and what he can purchase. I have done as much as possible could for Mr Halford and selfe on Satterday went to Annishan to agree for corn. They stood on their terms then and would not comply anything reasonable, imagining we wanted corn to goe to them. Beleive as you will but it is far better to be always stockt with 1000 chests than to want 100, for they know when it is their harvest time to reap both the beneffitt and gather the gleaning, and this I beg, whenever a ship comes next you would be so kind as to send a cano or canoes to carry it off to the boat, for I cannot gett one of any size for love or mony, although I have endeavourd much, have sent to Laggue 55 and there is not one to be had by reason of the warrs . The times here are extraordinary duJI, here is not twenty able men left in the twone [= towne], they begin to be fearful ! and bring their gold chests in the Castle. In fine, I know not what their apprehentions are unless it is with fear of success. God grant it be for the best. Today have sold 2oz of snaphances and 1oz lead barrs, and they say will have more dayly, so beg a supply of both, with good ammunition and more men for our own safegard and the Company intrest. I write in hast according to your commands. 495. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, I 9 Jan. 1686/7 Yours of yesterdayes date I have received by Peter, together with 50 snaphances and 50 lead barrs. There is 13 of the snaphances halfe of the but ends broak of, one without a lock and several! almost out of the stocks. Ifl am charged with firelock musquetts pray Jett the denomination be altered, for they are not so. Shall not lett slip any opertunity but render advice upon the least prospect of a trade and intimate particularly the goods that shall or wiU vend. I have by this cano sent up twenty chests of corn. To answer about the nicconees, and speaking my mind freely, I am very .loath to lanch out any mony for what I never received. If they were narrow I protest they were as I received them, without any addition or alteration or demunition but only[= except for] the six peices which I sold. Your Worship and Gentlemen are men of reason, and I propose this: a negro payes for one sort of goods and through mistake receives another, afterwards he calls himselfe to mind he paid for the other, which comes to more, you will in justice sattisfie him. Though this may well be against me, yett I plead that the transgressor, be who it will, that first gave them the denomination of broad nicconees and alterd the prosperty [= property] of the goods [should] make restitution , for it is very severe for one man to pay for anothers default , so hope your candid constructions of this will administer justice to [Ralph Hassell]. 496. Ra lph Hassell Annamaboe, 27 Jan. 1686/7 Yours of yesterdayes date I have received, and concerning what com I have now is 113 chest of old com, haveing shipt but 100 aboard Captain Hosea 56 and forty five sent to Cabo Corso this month . I have but 15 chests of new com, but in 4 or 5 dayes I can have from the Annishan people paid in their 4 or 5 hundred chests if they are as good as their words. I shipt from thence in one day, near two hundred chests. I am promised much here but here is no people to bring it in, but they say in a dayes time or two people wi ll come downe, which I give little creditt to, for as far as I can understand they are in great consternation of mind, fearing much Ahenesahs aid, for they say he will scarce come to their assistance, and the Aboncames 57 makes incursions on their territores dayly, approaching nearer and nearer. This is what I can leam at present. If any ffurther occmrences happen shall not fail to advise . Assina sayes that whilst he lived at Succondee he had the allowance of three angles per month, lie takes care in blowing the mony and likewise is i[n]steed of Captain Dick the interpreter, so I request your answer to this and whet her I may take any quantitty of corn at Annashan. Here I am promised more dayly, as it comes i:nwi ll dayly advise you. 497. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 29 Jan. 1686/7 Yours of yesterdays date I received and as soon as I read the contents imediately sent a man to Annishan to measure com and thing[= think] to goe thether my selfe today to agree for the quantity you order, for here I cannot gett any, being no people to carry it, all being gon into the cuntrey, and when have any quantity will advise. You write I may sell narrow nicconees at 3a, I never had none that I know of, nor flowerd silk longees. As concerning the warrs I know no farther than what I advised of in my last, but that they expect the enimy to give the ffirst onsett, they being all prepa rd. As any other news shall happen will render an account. Here is much wanted some tarr and trucks for great gunns, also spunges for have not one, some small shott, ladles and worms for minion and faulcon, 58 which are the biggest guns [we] have, some match and cathridge paper, some old junck for wads. I want short irons, haveing but 3 pieces, for whenever I sent slaves I never receive any back. Also firelocks. 498. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 3 Feb . 1686/7 These accompanyes my January accounts with the ballance, which is so small that I am in a maner ashamed to insert it in computation of the foregoeing month , it being but 2mk I Ota. I much fear as yett the alteration or increase of better times till Dame Fortune crowns these people with victory, which they in my apprehension seem dubious of, for yesterday they sent from Fanteen to command all able men to bear arms up thither and hung a fittish at the gate that no man should come to trade to sell any com or any other thing, butt imediately to repare with arms to Ffannteen. I was forced to give the Braffo and Cabushers to take it down againe 2 lead barrs and .a barrell of powder and a pintadoe that we might not be debard the liberty of people to bring refreshment to sustain us, which is granted, and people have free egress and regress. Quashe presents his servis to you, who came down last night to settle his affairs before the battle. I humbly request 3 or 4 men more by the return of the cano, I wi II if you please send up three of the greatest sotts in Guine, which much perplex me by their sottishness. I beg you would send John Pound down as a se1jant, for I much want a sober man for that place, and Jtake him to be one; if you have one a fitter man in your estimation, I refer it to your grave judgment. Likewise for what I wrote for in my last, with a pair of moulds to make shott. If any four pound basons at Cabo Corso may send what you can, halfe to Mr Elwes and halfe to me, for I have been desired to write for them and so hath Mr Elwes in my hear ing. I have not mentiond any thing about the nicconees in my account s by reason they were not inserted in the last, but when I know what you will demand , if you will be so hard as to extract from me I must refound. 499. Ralph Hassel.I Annamaboe, 7 Feb. [16]86/7 I received yours of the 5th instant yesterday and perceive thereby your displeasure in mine which you formerly received. If I could tell in what, I would strive to amend it and shall for the future avoid inserting any thing but what is the Company concerns. I did not imagine anything in mine could be taken for flattery in the least. The putting up the fittish at the gate was on this wise: the Braffo and Quarranters had sent for powder and shott, which I denyed thinking it but frivilous and that it had been no such thing; the next day without any notice to me the Fittisherers came and put it up, forbiding on pain of their displeasure any man to trade for corn or goods &ca before I could advise you of itt, [and] denyd any sustenance to supply us, and rather than want provitions, and fearing itt would increase by neglecting to grant their demands, I paid it. I canot learn that I was in any wayes impossed on, they are so insolent now that a man can hardly stand sentinell at the gate but they affront him one way or another without the least occasion in the world. I bad not mentioned any thing about Yabboy bad I not been importuned by him, and for the future I will not meddle or make any more with other mens business of that nature. If these ships have brought perpetuanoes, sheets and tallow I desire your Worship to send me some. Trade is now very dull by reason of the warrs. Per the cano have sent 20 chest of com. Have not now sent up the men, haveing so few men left to doe duty which are able. 500. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 11 Feb. 1686/7 By Henry Clements I received yours of yesterdays date , who me I wi ll assist to the utmost of my power upon all occasions as shall be requisite against the settlement of the French if they attempt it,59 and if they doe I will render timely advise and observe orders as from time to time as you shall direct. I purpose in the evening to goe to Annishan and se what quantity of corn comes in there, for I have not heard from there this two dayes and when I know I will give your Worship an account and withall beg that a ship may come and fetch it away with what I have here. I want much some sheets, blew perpetuanoes, tallow, boysadoes that are good, for want ofwbich I have no trade. Pray supply me likewise with what I advised for in mine of the 29th January last and 9th instant. This is the needful! at present, only I beg some paper, being in great want for it to answer what letters may come. 501. Ralph Hassell Annamabo, 13 Feb. 1686/7 Yours of yesterdays date received together with the goods therein mentioned, which will use my best endeavour to dispose of, and also desire that as soon as any perpetuanoes come you will spare some. I have veiwed my coppy of November account and cast it up article per article and canot find the error out, soe I beg your favour to know where it lyes, that I may be righted. If to my prejudice I acknowledg that in Janua1y account and will make it good. I render you bumb.le thanks, for giveing me account of my mistakes and will endeavour to amend, elce I should be disingenious to be obstinate. I have now sent up Jeremiah Mitchell and Samuel Walker, the former is Jeremy, a person that is so ill humourd, thatt not but wisht him hence many times. There is nothing said nor acted but what he relates to the Blacks and in general! is very abusive. Walker is desireous to come up (tho ugh faulty by two much drinking). I have sent up John Teag the gunner, be hath an account of what is wanting and hope you will be pleased to supply according to your promise. I also desire some paper for have none for accounts, or letter[s]. I have endeavourd by every vessell to supply myselfe, but canot for love or mony. I pray by next to spare a quarter casque of palm oyle, for here is none to be had. 502. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 16 Feb. 1686/7 By the cano you sent yesterday I received yours together with three white men and John Teag the gunner, the stores also therein inserted falling right, which will endeavour to use to utmost advantage, and se everything managed for the best. Likewise received two bails of perpetuanoes and two chest of sheets , for which shall give credditt for in my accounts accordingly and endeavour the best I can for to vend them. I have received the paper and quils which comes in time of necessity. Will also take notice about the mens pay. I canot deny but the com is bad. I wish I could help it, I doe tbe best I can. Captain Hosea said if many of his slaves dyed when they feed on it he will make a protest against it, these were his words and Chilper advised him to it. 503. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 18 Feb. 1686/7 These goes by Domini 60 who with 4 of the Cabushers sonns were sent to me to desire me to send the Braffo and Quarranters two small gunns which are about j of a hundred[ weight] a piece. I told them I would not doe it without your order, they tell us the Dutch lent them two, so Domini goes himselfe to know your pleasure. They promis reward if they overcome. I beg pardon for this troble. 504. Ralph Hassell Annamabo, 25 Feb. 1686/7 These are to render your Worship the advice of the good success that the Fanteners have had over their enimyes. 61 Yeste rday they fought and vanquished them and have taken (if they report not a lye) many slaves. I would this morning timely [have] rendred this advise but such crouds of people comeing in bringing the heads of the victory would not admitt me any leasure untell now, unless I would have undergon the scandall, reproach and ill will of these people, who are upon the last [= least] occasion of this nature, apt to reflect upon a whole nation. It hath cost me this morning most considerable in liquor to congratulate their good success; and I hope within few dayes slaves will come in, so beg to have a good supply of irons , and as they come in will render advise of it that so I may send them up. The Captain of the Arcanyes is come to Annishan and has sent to write to your Worship for goods to be sent there. I sent Henry Clements back to tell him that whatever be wanted I would supply him from hence, as yett have no answer to that. I have about 170 chests of com at Annishan and begg your Worship and Gentlemen that the fast ship that wants com may take it in, for I hold it not safe to lett it abid there, as here and now may have in a short time corn enough here. May it please your Worship Quashee is come down; and this I send by his sonn who beggs that which I told him could not be granted, which is that Docter Macdowall might come and se his hand, he has lost the forefinger of the left hand and his thum cutt much; I advised him immediately to go himselfe, but he sayes he cannot as yett, he would not be quiett till I sent. SOS. Ralph Hassell Annamabo, 8 March [l6]86/7 Yours of yesterdayes date have received by Daniell Coopeman and shall follow your orders and directions therei n. By this cano have sent up nine very good men slaves, likwise what Mr Elwes has bought, which is twelve men, in all is 21. I have very dull trade and I am much frustrated in my expectations of buying com, for they hold it at extraordinary rates, and are a goeing to war again but with whom they will not tell, but it's conjectured with the Fetues. 62 506. Ralph Hassell Annamabo, l O March 1686/7 Yours of this dayes date have received, and in answer thereto I have at Annishan on the Company account one hundred and seaventy chests of come, with what have here will make up one hundred twenty odd. For the slaves I have sent up were all very good and not the least defected. I shall acquaint the Cabusheers of your command about come and slaves although I beleive to little purpose, for they will not take under two angles per chest. 507. Ralph Hassell Annamabo, 11 March 1686/7 I sent this messenger on purpose and beg a supply of irons, for slaves present and have not one pair of irons left. I have speak to Bonneshee for corn and slaves, and his answer is they must all meet together first, which will be to morrow, and you shall know their minds, and when I know shall acquaint your Worship. 508. Ralph HasselJ Annamaboe, 13 March 1686/7 I received yours of yesterdayes date, also tenn pair of irons, and have sent up 3 slaves, which is all I have bought. Trade is very dull and I fear shall take very little mony more than what will defray charges of the Factory . They ask very dear for com, and say they will not take less than two angles per chest, and say it will grow dearer, they pretend a great scarcety by reason of the warr. 1nfine they are very great villians, and a combyned pack of knaves as any in Guyney , and no beleife in thm. Henry Henderson desires to goe to Cabo Corso to bleed and purge for a humour in his arme. 509. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe , 19 March 1686/7 Just now by Captain Draper I received yours ordering me to ship three hundred and thirteen chests corn on board him, in case I had so many. Mr Elwes and my selfe can supply him , and if your Worship and Gentlemen pleases to send down a 9 or 7 hand cano will dispatch him with what expedition I can, and with[out] a cano I cannot put any aboard. I have endeavourd the purchaseing of a cano, and cannot , by reason of the warrs in those parts where they are. Yesterday the come roome at Annamaboe, one side brake downe and much come lost, the people makeing use of such advantages. I begg that I may have a cano down to night. 510. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 24 March 1686/7 By this cano you will receive ten men slaves which were bought at Agga, Mr Elwes desireing me to send them up. The cano had returned yesterday bad not the men been lazy. I have sent up a white man to look affter them , and at his return request a hogshead lyme and a hogshead oftarris for the Castles use. Now the rains comeiug on it is and will be much wanted, Captain Draper is not gon as yett but tarries to make up his complement of com , which I beleive cannot be effected here, I wrote in one of myne lately that he might have bad it here , which I could have performed bad not one end of the house at Annishan falne down, and these people kept there words with mee , for have paid for much more , but I see and find no cridditt is to be given to what they say, so that I am altogather weary of this place, and am not able to maintaine the charge they da[i]ly putt me two[ = to], unless I should runn out the Royall Company goods , so humbly offer it to your considerations. 511. Ralph Hassell Annamabo , 27 March [1687] Yours of yesterday es date with a cask of lyme and a cask of tarris I have received , and shall observe your orders as to the purchaseing of corn. I would willingly a waited on you but am not very currant. I wish you all a merry Easter. 512. Ralph HasseJI Annamaboe, Ultimo March 1687 By the bearer of this I received yours and shall follow your orders therein. On Sattrday Mr Halford shall goe up and carry my accounts with the ballance, which is but verry small. Have allready begann to inventory the warehouse and shall effecte it by the time prescribed , that is tomorrow night. 513. Ra lph Hassell Annamabo, Primo Aprill 1687 This accompany 's Mr William Halford and serves for covertt of my March accounts, by whome have also sent up the ballance thereof, being six ounces and three taccoes, a verry inconsiderable quantity to the proportion of the charge, God send times to alter . I have alsoe sent up the inventory of all the goods, which agrees with the remaynes in my accounts. I am sorry to write of dammage done by ratts, which is verry much, especially in the allejarrs: we are so pester'd with them that they are not easely destroyd , although keep three catts in the warehouse. I have enclosed here a noat of severall perticularrs which is much wanting, and desire to have them if possible as soon as may bee; also pray send on the Company account 200 iron bans, two cases sayes, and six roles of tobacco if any, also a case of looking glasses. I have not as yett received above 7 chests of com but am promised at 2a per chest a quantity if they faill not, PS nayles of severall sorts hooks and staples to lett the windows open, 10 pair a quarter caske of palme oyle some pad locks 20 dea ls to make a place to take gold in and mend doors and windows 2 trowells a hammer 2 or three pair of long irons and some short ones, with revetts and fore locks a punch or two & cold chissells 514. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 5 April 1687 1 received yours ofyesterdayes date by the nine hand cano with one hundred and fifty iron bans , and severall stores under mentioned therein; only the fowá shackles for the long irons are wanting, so that they are of no use. I doe desire two cases of sayes, and two hogsheads of rum, with hasps and staples for the windows. Here is no trade for any manner of commodities but drams given for ackeys, which makes me dissatisfied very much to think that I am so unfortunate a servant to my Masters, I wish the times may alter, elce I shall be a shearer in their suffer ings 515. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 8 April 1687 Yours of the sixth instant I have received, to gather with my March account which you sent down to rectifie, to which answer that for the 45 chests of com which was lost and spoyled at Annishan. I will make affidavit that I paid for one hundred seventy five chests putt into that house which fell, and when it was removed to another it measured out one hundred and thirty by the same chest strict measure. Then for slaves which were bought for sayes, you are pleased to say that I know they are rated att I oz in ba1ier, which l aver I know no such thing or that ever I was orderd so, except for corn, which indeed I have formerly wrote orders for. I tbought the slaves very reasonabley bought, which is 7 peez per man at 14a per say. Then Gentlemen to the complaint about the great charge in carrying the corn of; which I will demonstrate to you I had hyred a 9 hand canoe the day before the Cape Coast cano came down, att Annishan, not knowing wheitber Jshould have had one. I gave 3a for the use of the cano, and paid the canoemen 4a and paid Annishan peop le to carry the come down 3a, haveing but 3 of the Company slaves there, besides 1 of the Cape Coast canomen and Mr Elwes canomen, for he sent me his cano; and what I paid is more than what I charged in my accounts. Hope this will be sattisfactory and to content, and as for affidavitt or attestation for the com Ile send my own who, paid for so many chests there, if that will be sufficient. I also received by the cano two cask of rum, and 50 iron barrs with 4 shackles, but one revitt. The mony that I sent up am sorry proves not to content, but this I can assure you it is without any mixture by me and just as I received it; and for the future will pick it bette r. 516. Ralph Hassell Annamabo, 9 April 1687 Since mine of yesterdayes date I have received your order to what noats James Bayly sha ll charge on me for oyster shells. The contents shall observe according to order. 517. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 11 April 1687 This morning came several Arcanyemen and bought all the sheets I had that was good, and told me withall that the way was now open and desired mee to write for more sheets and perpettuanoes. I have not had any trade this month till today and have taken 12oz. I also sent to Mr Elwes on his noate for the Royall Companyes account 9 perpetuanoes, soe that I beleive he has a trade likewise. I desire 50 perpettuanoes; 10 chests of sheets; 200 lookinke glasses in sorts no 3, 4, 5; tenn barrells powder, for I sould 3 today and more asked for, which if sent tomorrowe theyle not cany their money to the Duche, for they cannot tany as they pretend. This goes by Henry Clements and Assina. For Clements being at Anisham, it is to noe purpose and if you intende to send any goods and to settle it he is abusive and not titt to be with any :ffactor there, this I thought good to advise your worshipe and Gentlemen. If your inclinatione is to settle Anisham I heare that there is som money there now, which I offerd to furnish them with what goods they wanted , butt they are for haveing goods there, which in my judgement will not quitte the expense the company will be at, soe leave it to your consideration. 518. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe , 12 April 1687 Yours of this dayes date is come to hand and is before mee, and canot immagine the reason of such necessityes in remitting aggaine my accompts. Had there bene any fraude found therein it would have been a good reason to object against them , butt knowing there is none imboldens mee to speake in my owne behalfe. For the barrel! of powder expended, wheithere or noe it was ever the companies orders that the ir garrisons should not with respecte answere salutes from their owne vesse l ls, nay if a stranger out of complement salutes , either of you would you not thinke it unbeseeming yourselves to dis[r]especte civillity, nay whether by the Companys letters establishment or otherwise they ever stinted or gave limitts to what salutes should be answered by their ganisons , soe much as a barrell of powder was really spent bona fide and without any lafishment As for better sattisfactione of the come being lost, shall send up affidavitt when have transcribed my accompts, by reason my name was calceld. The 50 perpettuanoes and 10 barrells powder is received and shall for the future observe your orders for buying of slaves with sayes, which will be none, for today I see Bonneshee sell 8 men for good gold att 30a per man to the Arcanyes to cany up into the country, and if a Blacke gives soe much one to another they will exacte more from a white man, soe leave all under your judicious considerations , which hope will produce favorable constructions for [RH] 519. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 15 April 1687 This serves for covert ofmy March accompt , which I have transcribed anew; and gave creditt for halfe a barrell of powder; and by this bearer I have sent up the money. lnclosed is alsoe a certificate for the come which was loste at Anisham , which hope may prove to content. 520. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe, 22 April 1687 This serves for coverte of the certificatte you wrote for in your laste, and is alsoe to desire you to lett mee know what has been the usuall custome to be given the Braffoe and Quarranters of Fanteen and Cabusheers of Annamaboe, att their putting their come in the grounde . I never knew of it till juste the day, and sayed they could nor wou ld not tarry till I had acquainted my selfe, soe by their hideous taunts I gave 8 gallons of rum and. a barreU of powder to all, and they tould mee withall if it were not allowed they would pay for it; soe would gladly know, how much has been allowed, that I may charge noe more in my months accompt. Nothing of trade presents for any comodity excepting sheets, which I have none that is good. 521. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 28 April 1687 Just now received the inclos ed from Mr Whitting, and desired mee to send itt to you.63 I made as much haste as I could, knowing what haste itt required, and begg an answer by the bearer of what I writt in my taste , of the usuall customes given to the Blackes att putting tbeire come in the ground, for till I know I cannot make up my accompt, for what bas been the allowance I must charge and noe more. If I have given more I must nay ought not to be blamed, not being acquainted what is usuall given, soe pray inform me by the bearer. 522. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 4 May 1687 I received yours of the 29th of Aprill ordering mee not to charge anything given the Braffoe and Quarranteers and Cabusheers at their putting come in the ground, which I am certaine has been allowed. If you please to inspect Mr Nightingalles Aprill and May accompts you will find spirritts and powder. Alsoe peruse the contract made with them att the building the Castle, in which they say it is insertted, butt I have not charged any, though have paid what I wrott I bad. This now serves for coverte for my Aprill accompts; the ballance thereof! have sent up by Daniell Copeman, being 4mk 4oz 6a 4ta. I would have come my selfe with it, butt haveing noeboddy I could trust here thought it convenient to send itt by him. I have not hearde from Mr Bailey since he came downe nor have I seen anybody to demand sattisfaction for any more then 58 butts of shells, which I have paid. I have Mr BaiJys tally, and as they demand sattisfaction shall pay them. Trade continews ven-y dull. 523. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 6 May 1687 Yours of the 4th currant by Daniell Copeman I have received, and in every particular therein shall ffollow your orders. The 3d instant att night (affter had sealed up my letter and accompt) about 8 or 10 yards in length of the mud wall to the sea which inclosed the yarde, fell downe, which I have fenced in I ordered Daniell Copeman, by worde of mouth to acquainte you thereof , soe request a couple of crowes, a maule and wedges to breake stone to build up the breach and farther, for I imagine it to be far better then mudd walls . Likewise to spare a man slave or two, for have no more since Hanse went up then[= than] four men, and two are not able to worke for worms in their !eggs. Alsoe pray (if any are made) some hookes and staples for the windowes , 12 hookes 24 staples , for the rust have devoured all these here soe that they are altogether useless. 524. Ralph Hassel l Anamaboe, 12 May 16[87] Just now came downe 7 or 8 of the Quarrenteers and demanded five months custome. I paid them in January as per my monthly accounts , 4 barrells powder and 1 oz lead barrs, which they acknowledge ; they alsoe demand another case of spirritts for putting their come in the ground, which they say they will have from Agga if not here. I have been threatened this weeke to bee sent from hence, and now tomorrow expect to here farther , these fellows being come, and for what unless I would give all the Companies goods away, they are soe unreasonable they know not what to have. I writte this in haste, that you would consider and send some one early to morrow to know their demands. I know nothing but their threats, soe cannot by any meanes advise for any thing what to doe or bow to act. In fine I am weary of my like[ = life] amongst them and wish my selfe cleare of this place. I cannot ad further, being in haste to send away , and desire as much speed from you. 525. Ralph Hassell Annamaboe , 17 May 1687 I received yours of the 13 instant, butt before the arivall thereof I had with great trouble concluded their senceless pallavar, and paid them theire juste due to the laste of month, and have a receipt for 12oz, that is for 8 months custome commencing the primo October and endi ng the ultimo May , This serves to acquainte you that Henry Hendersone and Robert Huges, which I now send up, the first denies doeing his duty and obey comma111de, and sayes hee will doe butt what he lists, and will not bee compelled to anythinge , and Hughes bas nott done the Companie one peny worth of servis this foure months , and withall soe idle and slothfull that if sette aboutte cleaning of arms he spoilles and marrs what he takes in hand, and soe reffractory that if bid him to doe anything, his answer is I doe nott care, Ile goe to Cape Coaste, and that is the answer of severall here, which I hope your worship and Gentellmen will see them wellcomed. I have paid them in parte what is underwritten, which pray stop out of their wages , that I may have the money, for I purpose nott to charge anything paid them in my accompts; and in the roome of these two I requeste Henry Stephens: for an armorer, and John Warrington if to be spared being a smith may make worke that is wanting here, as spikes for charidges [ ==carriages?] and bolts, which pray send aboutt 20 of 14 inches and 10 inches, hal fe of each sorte spikes, the chaITidges are all outt of repa ire.  I have paid Henderson in parte of 2 months  6a  and Hughes  4  526. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 22 May 1687 This serves to accompany Mr Boylston, who togather with Mr Wbiteing haveing yesterday ffinished the inventoring of all the goods, &ca in the ffactory of Anamaboe, since the compleating of which he being here received your com.mands order ing Mr Elwes and my selfe to buy what good come wee could, but here is none to be had att any rattes, for they send all to Accraa, that they cann, where they make more then 4a per cheste, and say that your worship give them come att 3a they will buy it soe, and I am certaine as I former ly advised your Worship and Gentellmen it wou ld be farr better to have a thousand chests beforehand, than to have a I 00, and had not I bad a contradictary order for buying of come, I might then have had a quantity in all probability, to have furnished a ship, butt now itt is to late and cannot possibly be effected, if would give 4a, which Mr Boy lston can sattisfie you, 1 requeste some sheets, tallow and lead barrs. 527. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe , 25 May 1687 I am sorry these should bringe soe bad newes. Yesterday I bough[t] one of the fostiest men slave I have sene a longe time. He had not been. an houre in irons , when Mr Elwes's slaves came for watter, and whiles drawing of an anchor the slave of his owne will sprang into the tank, and Henry Underhill standing by c1yd out for help, which immediate ly gott downe a ladder and John Pound and Will Goff boath went in and dived and after some tyme brought him up, but dead, though endeavourd what we could to gett life in him, by rouling him on a caske and hang ing him by the hecles, but all in vaine. Bonashee was with me today and told mee bee would endeavour to gett 40 or 50 chests of come in 3 weeks time at 3a per chests, soe desire your answer. Iff any sheets , tallow, lead barrs cane be spared Jett mee have some; alsoe powder, for I have butt 6 barrells left, for I spared Mr Elwes 6 the other day. 528. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe , 28 May 1687 I received yours by the 7 hand canoe, togatber with eight barrells of gunn powder, and I am glad to heare that Captain Thomson is safe arrived to windward. Have noth ing of moment to enlarge. 529. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe , 28 May 1687 By the great canoe I received on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company, five chests of sheetes, fifty lead barrs, and twenty .firkins tallow, and shall observe yow-orders in keeping a distinct accompt thereof, and endeavour the sale. This is the needfull, and hope receipt sufficient. 530. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 10 June 1687 Yours I received with thirty halfffirkins of tallow and ten whole ditto, which shall endeavour to dispose of for the Companyes accompt. According to your orders have now sent you per this canoe a woman and child bought per me, also one woman which was formerly bought by Mr Elwes. Three dayes since one of the Royall Companyes slaves named Andrew, which was mason, dyed of the fflux . This night a great part of the stone wall which in closed the yard towards the town fell downe; so desire those things I left an accompt of when at Cabo Corso with Christopher Price, also if possible two or three hogsheads of lyme and tarras. [PS] John Tagg desired my leave to go to Cabo Corso to receive what his brother left, which I granted. 531. Ralph Hasse ll Anamaboe, 12 June 1687 I received yours of yesterdayes date, wherein you intimate your dislike of my informing Mr Elwes whether I had paid the Braffo and Quarenteers six pieze per month for custom. All the time it was under my charge I never pa id any mony for the custome of Agga, so it must be for both factoryes, but I told him that I did never read the contract. He answer'd me again that be thought the pallavera over by paying them the custome for putting their small com 64 into the ground, and farther [they] added they would go to Cabo Corso and gett their ground rent for Agga at 12 angles per month and 6 piezes for Anamaboe. Never a word was ever menconed to me by the Quarenteers, but they are minded to be rogues as they ever were . Yesterday they had been like to have served me so or worse, because I refused to take cracra mony , withall adding that no English men should tarry here, but all their goods they [= the English Jshou ld take away and carry it to Ffetu, for that they loved them better than the Ffanteens. Wherein I have occasioned trouble or impeded trade I know not, but they know it as well as I, butt they'r will they'! make their law, and its not so easy a matter as is imagined to perswade them from their own inventions and wills. Pray hasten some lyme and tarras , for if the ra ins continue shall be at a great streight for want thereof. 532. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 17 June 1687 I received yours ofyesterdayes date by Assina, and as to what you say that when I paid the Braffo and Quarenteers , I should have told them it was for both factoryes , they knew it was for both as well as I could have told them, for they never made demands for any thing before , and these two that has made all this stirr are slaves or little better to the Quarenteers , for I went as soon as I received your last and acquainted them with Mr Elwes. Itwas as I have menconed, they are there still and have taken away the ffetish65 and wait for one of the Quarenteers to come down , who is one that signed to my receipt, and as soone as he comes lie make him sensible how it is. When your letter arrived yesterday Twas there, but as far as I from Mr Elwes do understand , they purpose to begin a new custome , for before a small time of Agent Greenh ills departure 66 they rose this custome here and shutt up Mr Thelwall , and would have custome as they had at Cormantine and still have for every shipp that shall arrive at the Mine. l request those materialls for the Castle I advised for, especially 3 or four hogsheads of lyme and tarras, and Ile send up empty hogsheads in the roome. Pray send down John Tagg with two or three men more in lieu of them I last sent up. Lett one be a smith if possible to make iron work, for it is very much wanted, also an Ardra slave or two, a mason, for ours is dead and is very much need of. The ffactory is much out of repair. This is what needfuU at present, and hope you will be pleased to answer my requests. [PS] l pray spare a stick or two of wax or some wafers. 533. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe , 25 June 1687 Yours of yesterdayes date have received, togather with 40 half ffirkins tallow, allso 3 caske of lime and l oftarras , with the iron work menconed in yours. I have by the canoe sent all the good com I have, being 13 chests, also a sample of the other rotten com I was offerd yesterday, 6ta psome [= per sum?] per chest, which I thought fit to advise you I have sold some, which I thought better than to throw it all away. About a month since at the turning it, the bottom with the moystnesse of the weather was so rotten and caked togather that nigh twenty chests I was forced to throw away, il stinck so much. PS. Daniell Coopmens being very ill thinks if he were with the Doctor be should recover, therefore at his request I have permitted him to go to Cabo Corso for three or four dayes. l pray send down three or four men , for am now very weakly manned, allso three or four Ardraes more if to be spared. 534. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 27 June 1687 In my last I omitted the advising you for iron barrs, wh ich I now want, those that are good and marked, for none else vends here. I have a great many here which are not so qualifyed, so pray if any markt ones at Caho Corso spare them to the number of two or three hundred. 535. Ralph Hassell Charles Fo1t, Anamaboe, 30 June 1687 Last night ha ppened an accident. A slave which I bought this mon th and another more which belongeth to Captain Heggen [ = Eggin] made their escape away from this house by the enticement of some Cabo Corso people, so desire you Gentlemen diligent search and enquiry , for Captain Heggen makes great noise about it. The said slaves were mett this morning betwixt this place and Annishan with a Cabo Corso man, making as I understand the ir way towards you. 536. Ralph Hasse ll Anamaboe, I July 1687 I wrote you yesterday morning of an accident which happened the other night, and wish could hear news of the slaves, for I am extreamly perplext about the losse, and am threatened hard for large satisfaction for the Cappusheers man. These are allso to acquaint you that yesterday Quashee in the hearing of Mr Wh iting, Mr Walker and my self made a great noise and stirr about two cowes, about forty fouls &ca, which he sais Agent Nurse 67 owes him, for which he demands satisfaccon for, and if he pays him not he will pay himself out of the goods which shall come down from Cabo Corso to this place, so begg you to make enquiry of the truth . I have wrote to Agent Nurse about it to be satisfied with speed, that so [sic] no detriment may accrew to the Royall Company for the future. I have wrote you that I wanted more men, I have but three that is capable of doing duty night and day, which they complain is to hard for them to do. Pray spare two or three men more. Likewise pray send two hundred iron barrs, lett them all be marked, for they will take no other here. Have had a ve1y small trade this last month. (PS] Since the writing of the foregoing I received yours of yesterdays date, taxing me with negligence and want of care in securing the slaves , which I averr they were well secured at night when lockt in the prizon, but they broke an iron barr and crept through into the yard, where there lay an Ardra slave to look after them, and after broke a padlock on one of the doors and gott over the walls where there is a breach by the late excessive rains. Also a white sentinell is every night on the tower all night, and how it should happen that that they should gett away I cannot imagine , un lesse the black sentinells should be consenting to it, so pray a more favorable constrnction than to imagine me any wayes negligent or carelesse. have acquainted Mr Whiting with what you wrote me 537. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 4 July 1687 I received yours by the 11 hand canoe, also one hundred and fifty iron barrs and two men. I would gladly know how much each man has a month, against I pay them. I would have sent you up my monthly accompts but have done but two. Th e ballance allso, which is six mark, four ounces, eight angles, eleven taccoes, shall send with them the first good oppertunity. If any sheets to be spared pray send ten chests, for all 1 had is gone. Yesterday I was desired to write for powder by Bonashee, but heel[ = he'll] give but 13a for 14 barrells , and if that may be sold so then send some. 538. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 8 July 1687 I arrived safely about six or seven last night here, and as I enterd the gate the Bendefoes after I was in made outcryes to hinder my entrance, and as I am informed they were ordered by the Cappusheers to do it, and not pennitt me to come again into the Castle. The reason I know not, unlesse I would give them all the Royall Companyes concernes. They daily pretend to new customes due to them, and that it has been paid by all my predecessors. I have by their continuall and unjust demands so much drained my whole small stock, and all for my Royall masters interest and safety of their concerns, that I am not able to lanch any fartther in the vast ocean of the unsafe forcible and unsatiable people. They demanded three cases of spiritts, besides half a barrell of powder. If it will or your pleasure is to allow it pray signify it to me. Else my humble peticon is, I candidly present [sic: = request] your judicious consideracons either to order some ffactor you judge most fitting to take charge of this ffactory and the concern es of the Companye or remove me from these diabo!icall evil! people , and for the removal I shall think myself eternally obliged for your favor, for I am very loath to defraud my masters of a mite, they having been just to me. Pray afford me your resolves with what expedicon may be. I begg excuse, being disturb'd in mind and is the only occasion of this scrawle. 539. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 15 July 1687 Yours of the 13th I have received, and render hearty thanks for your kind profers and promises, but commiserating my condicon adds nothing to my releif, neith er abates the demands of these unjust and unsatisfyable people. Would fair words assuage them I could in some manner appease them, but all the eloquence of Cicero goes not so far as a case of brandy or a cloth. In mine of the gth I write with unfeigned heart, beseeching and humbly desiring my removall. Likewise do now begg the same with humble peticon to you , and shall think my selfe eterna lly obliged to you. In what station soever I can be serviceable to my Royall masters interest, I am willing to submitt to your judicious consideracons, for in verity my continuance here will be unprofitable for them, committing it wholly to your mature judgements. Yesterday being on board Captain Gould to take my leave of Agent Nurse, 68 Mr Walker sent me the enclosed note by Quashees son, whom I heard demand payment of Agent Nurse for 3 cowes and 4 sheep &ca, which he denyed that ever he had nor would pay anything. What the event will be I cannot saye. Accordingly as you wrote me I have endeavored to sell barrs at 22 per bendy, but have not sold one nor cannott, which is a great hinderance in the sale of other goods. I could have sold a quantity of barrs at 24, whereas now the Dutch has the mony , so pray your answer. [PS] Just now the enclosed letter arrived in my hands. 69 540. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 23 July 1687 This accompanyes the canoe that came down yesterday, by which I have sent up two men slaves. One is the fellow I wrote of the last of June broke prison, which with great charge have gott him again. These unreasonable people would not Jett me have him unlesse I paid three pieze, which I did and hope it will be allowed of. The prison windowes are so rotten that it is not fitt to hold slaves till have a new one made . I am still perplext with this people. Just now came in three of the Quarenteers to demand knives to cutt their small corn, and will not tarry an hour before they have them, so that I am in the darkofwhatMrNightingale paid the last year, for they will have as many this. God send me well from hence , for my patience is quite worn out with them. 541. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe , 27 July 1687 Whereas on Satterday last, being the 23th of this instant July, the Cappusheers of Anamaboe (I then being Chief there) demanded a case of brandy as an accustoma1y dashee at their new year as they called it, that is at their cutting of their small com, which at first I denyed to them, and that I know no such custome and that I would be satisfyed first from you whether it wou ld be allowable , by reason I would give no ill presidents [= precedents ] for the time to come, their answer was that ifit was not accustomary and allowed ofby my predecessors and fo1111erAgents and if not by you they would pay for it, and on consideracon of which I did deliver them a case of rume, with which they went out of the gates seemingly well contented. Some small time after they were out of the gate they sent for me to render thanks for the same, and as it was their new year all Chiefs did use to drink with them. Not in the least imagining they had any design or prejudice of ill against me, I did go out. I had not gone six yards from the Castle wall without the gates but presently unsuspectedly a great number of Blacks interveened me and the gate on purpose to hinder mee from returning again, as I since found true. I then went to the Cappusheers, which satt under the wall about 7 or 8 yards farther, they desired me to sitt down, which I did, then they began long storyes, saying that at my going there I promised to be kind to them. I replyed, I never was otherwise. They answered that I would not take cracra mony as others had done before me, and that I would take no pawnes nor trnst them, 70 and that the English men were not so kind to them as the Dutch, for that wee [i.e. English] all loved the Fetuers better than the Ffanteeners, and that the Ffetuers were their enemyes, and that they [i.e. the English] might be better aided at Cabo Corso than at Anamaboe, and that J should not tarry there no longer; to which Jmade this answer, that I had orders not to take their cracra mony, it was so bad, and if I should take it it would occasion more bad mony to be made and brought to me, which I must make good, and that it behooved me to take none but what was good, and what others had done should not be a president for me. I told them likewise that I could not take pawns, knowing that they do not care to redeem them , and that for severa!l years Mr Thelwall had pawnes from severall of them and that time the Royall Companyes mony lay dead, and so they would do again ifl took any pawnes , and as for trusting of them I had to my losse done to much, which I have made good to the Royall Company, and as to the Dutch loving them better than the English, replyed they bad more reason for they were ever treacherous to us, as instance their selling Conuantine from us to the Dutch, 71 and as for being more kind to the Fetuers, though their enemyes, [they] were more faithfull ever than they, yett for their mony they might be supplyed as as well as they , for they have nothing without money , and what had I done that should so much incense them to that height. They still persisted in the same story, and that I should not go into the Castle again but I should instantly go to Cabo Corso, and that they would strip me naked and beat me as they had Mr Nightingale, unlesse I would send for an anchor ofrume. I well knowing that their crue lty infinitely transcends humane apprehensions, condescended to save myself impunified, and that I might go into the Castle again, which they would not permitt unlesse I left Mr Walker behind me as a pawn and that severall of them might enter with me. This was all done under the Castle walls where no damage could be done to them by any gunns, the fort being so ill contrived and so weakly manned that they esteemed it invallid. This I humbly offer to your consideracons and will averr to be truth, which is the only reason of my returning to Cabo Corso. Withall that their resolves are that I shall never return to Anamaboe to reside there. To all tlhat is above and within writt , I attest to be nothing but what is truth. 542. Ralph Hassell & James Nightingale Anamaboe, 30 July 1687 Yesterday wee arrived well here. The Cappusheers are all up in the country, so as yett have not had a pa llavera, but they have sent for them to acquaint them of our being here and do expect them down tomorrow, and as soon as have done anything shall immediately advise you. Have acquainted Mr Elwes with your desire , who will be here when wee treat with them. 543. Ralph Hassell & James Nightingale Anamaboe, 3 Aug. 1687 As yett wee have not had any discourse with the Cappusheers, they being all up in the country about some grand pallavera and will not come down till they have ended, which as wee understand will be Ffryday next. Till then shall desist from writing unlesse businesse of moment presents. 544. Ralph Hassell 72 Anamaboe, 7 Aug. 1687 This day about two boures since I have had a great discourse and longe debate with the Cabusheers, and the result is they will not again except of Ralph Hassell , he having spoiled the country by his refuseing to take Fanteen cracraes (which is nothing but meere brass), and that he will not trust them, nor take their pawns, that he will not buy noe come, and that alsoe by his meanes the Factory is not well fortified as it former ly was, which since the great raines it might have been don; would he have sattisfied them to their unresonable demands. Soe we boath desire and request the canoe wee came down in, and att our arrivall shall enlarge farther, soe that you may farther receive better sattisfaction. Soe in the interim begg your excuses 545. James Nightingale Anamaboe , 7 Aug. 1687 This day bad a paJlavara with the Cabushers, the result of them shall give an accompt at my corneing up. In order thereunto desire you will be pleased to send a canoe for my irnbarqument to Caboe Corsoe. 546. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 8 Aug. 1687 Yours of this date have received, and shall here fully give you the reso lution of these Cabusheers, Jmprimis that I Ralph Hassell shall noe longer stay here, butt if your pleased to send any other they will except of him, and still continews in the mind 1wrote to you before, which Mr Nightingale would not signe, elce it might not have had any impertinency or breach of orders, for I had not his orders butt well know the tennors was to endeavor quiettly to resettle mee if possib le and render advise to you of our proceedings imediatly, as I now desired him to doe the same. He utterly denyed signing to any thing, but would goe up himself tomorrow and tell what he had to saye. I desired Mr Walker to heare what he would say, who can attest the same. I demanded and desiared him to signifie with mee to you of what was sayed, he answered he would goe up tomorrow. I replyed it to be a greatt breach of our last orders, he replyed hee did not care. They are desiarous of those men who cannot weell be removed, 73 vizt Mr Whiting or Mr Elwes. They are now growne to such a height that unless speedily suppress ion this place will not be long tenable, the walls being downe and the Fort out of repare, which makes them soe insolent. I humbly beg your speedy answer, they are much insenste that I stay soe longe, and [I] feare there brooding brains will hatch more mische ife agains t mee, for MrNightingale , if as good or rather bad as his oath, will depart tomorrow early. I humbly begg your pardon ifremis in any particu lar, being written in haste. Pray when the canoe comes downe send some powder, sheets and blew perpetuanoes if any; the sheets all that are good are gon almost, the blew perpetuanoes all but one, and butt six ban-ells powder left. 547. Ralph Hassell Anamaboe, 9 Aug. 1687 Since the departure of Mr N ightingaJe all the Cabusheers of this place have been with a full cry, why did I not goe with him as I came with him. I told them he went contrary to your orders, and that bee could not tarry any longer for want of a doctor, and [they] by noe mean es would not heare of any tarr[y Jing till tomorrow; nor till I could here from you. Daniell Coapeman will tell you the same. They told him likewise he must goe too, butt ifl would give them three bottles of brandy, I should tarry till after dinner and not longer, which I did to sattisfie them; and when Igoe they will demand more, as I am informed; nay told by them, soe that I am putt to a deale of perplexity by his abruptly goeing away. I doubt must be forced to foot it all the way. I dare not venture to carry the money with mee, which is 5mk and 6ta, but will leave it with Mr Walker. In truth if a speedy course be not taken here, doe believe ina short time noe Factors nor others will be able to abide here. This is the tmth; as cann be made apeare, soe in hast to conclude. 548. James Walker James [sic= Charles] Forte, Anamaboe , 13 Aug. 1687 By advise of Mr Hassell that it's your command that I should send up an accompt of the stores now remaineing in the foresaid ffortt and signed per selfe, you will find per inclosed it's obeyed. This day has been a greatt difference between Captain Eggin and Boneeshee about a slave of the tatters, who has panniard gold and sheepe of a servant belonging to one Ashaw. The deniall of Boneeshee's delive1y of the said slave to be prosicuted according to the laws of their country made every Cabusheer his enyrny, in soe much that the whole downe [= town] was in annes, many sbott past on boath sides, but little damage. Had intilligence that had itt not been for Ahen, 74 whoe gave pawnes for Boneshee that he should comply with their justice, that he and slaves had severely suffered. The pal lavara is to be ended tomorrow , and as I am infmmed, it will cost Boneeshee at least six bendy's, besides charges of soldiers. I have not elce, only that the Cabusheers are yet veny civill and promise the same for the future. As to myself, give you the assurance of my duty in carefullness of the Royall Company es concernes. 549. James Walker Anamaboe , 21 Aug. 1687 By the 9 hand canoe l received yours, with ten whole barrels of powder, and fifty four gallons ofnm1me, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England . Here has been prying[ = plying?] to windward a Dutch sloop for some days , which suppose you may take to be Mr Bayly, which if had would have fulfilled yow.comands, so have thought fitt to returne back your letter to him. I have nothing of moment, only that the Cabusheers are impatient for a new chief, and the more because I am really very poore, and cannot supply their brandy pallate's. I give them faire words, which doth a little assuage their passions, which is only in the morning, when they say their stomacks are cold for want of a dram. They offer no abuse, but continue their visitts every morning. The Arcadians want knives much. 550. James Walker Annamaboe, 22 Aug. 1687 Understanding this afternoone that the Cabusheers designed to morrow morning to go up in the country to rowsaw , and that they would not returne under three weeks, sent to them to desire them to defer for a day or two, till had acquainted you with it, not knowing what buisiness you might have with them, so [they] have promised to stay till Thursday. Do in all submission begg pardon for my omission, in not sending the letter as nominated , which is now certainly inclosed. So waiting your pleasure I take leave. 551. James Walker Anamaboe , 26 Aug. 1687 Yours came to hand about six this evening, and shall send away the messenger tomorrow as sone as daye. The Cabusheers are all here, but had been gon only for a pallavara amoungst themselves. They designed to have went tomorrow, but on sight of yours sent them advise to the contrary. 552. Rice Wight Anamaboe , 31 Aug. 1687 Yesterday about twelve a clocke wee got downe here, where wee ware welcomed with a sea that broake into our canoe and wett us sufficiently. The Grandees of this place was att Cormantine, but the news of our arivall being carryed to them, made a speedy retturne. Yesterday in the affternoon went to Agga, and inventoryed that ffactory. This morning, wee discours'd the Cabusheers, who were all averse to Mr Hassells continuing in this place any longer, but are very well sattisfied with Mr Nightingall, who they promise to be kind to. Wee are now inventoring this ffactory (and hitherto very calme). Soe soon as finished will rettum and render you an accompt. 553. James Nightingale Charles Fort, Anamaboe, 9 Sept. 1687 These are to give you an accompt of my saffe arivall and civill reception per natives. Am att present verry buissie with them, soe begg your pardon doe not write you largely , as othe1wise would , but sl1all in two or three dayes time. Have sent by the canoe butts, hogsheads, and caskes twenty. 554. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 18 Sept. 1687 Yours with accompts yesterday came to hand, and shall according to order transcribe and rectifie. As to the 21 snaphanses gave credditt to the Cabusheers , shall give the Company credditt for in my accompts, so that will not give you occasion of an ill thought. I shall ever make it my study to gain your good opinion. Request your favour , that Mr Hassell may use his indeavours to obtaine of the Cabusheers the come for the snaphanses, which they promised to pay me , the Mareens son being a pawn for their performance , as Doctor Griffin well knows. Likewise desire to have orders whereby may pay the soldiers, also your pleasure in what wrote concerning the delivery of goods to Mr Cross, 75 and when have all the says, perpetuanoes, tallow &ca to supply me with, there being many Arcanies now here . 555. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 21 Sept. 1687 In respect to your orders of the l th instant hav e sent you the duplicat es ofJanuary, February, March, Aprill and May accompts, alsoe three of each for the month[ s] of June, July and August, all which belonging to Frederickburge for the yeare 1686/ 7,76 and hope in all particulars answer a faire and just accompt. My request is that may have your resolves concerning mine of the 18 instant, as to goods that have and may on occasion be delivered Mr Cross. You were pleased to spec ifie in your last the coming downe of the slaves , which I have not seen, soe thought good to advise you thereof , imagining that they may not follow your commands. Just now received a letter from Mr Pepperell directed to you, which you will now receive. 77 Jeremiah Mitchell is a very drunken ffelow, and not fitt to be imployed in any buisiness, he, as I am informed, being the only occation of the canoe 's being staved. I shall say noe more butt that he is whatever I know him a fellow not to be intrnsted . Here has been for some time a Dutch interlope r, on board which all Cabushiers and traders resort, soe that wee have had noe trade this severall dayes, neither can expect, as long as they heare of any shipps to windward or leeward, which [is] to say between Succondee and Winneba. 78 Mr Cross is and has been ill this three or four dayes. Desire your favor for instructions for the payment of the soldiers as now they are. 556. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 23 Sept. 1687 Yours of the 22th instant received, wherein you are pleased to say the sending goods from one place to the other it never did any good but occasioned trouble, and for my part I am very well satisfied with your order, which by me at all times shall be observed, but pray ley me tell you since goods was sent hither in my absence , I thought it my duty to acquaint you of it, that I might have Mr Cross his receipts for what have been delivered, or the goods restored , and Gentlemen I do not at all question but that you will supply us both when occasion shall present. You were on my departure pleased to order three men and two women slaves with William the Carpenter in order of repairing what is fallen downe, and without a black carpente r and mason, it cannot be don. For my part I do my indeavour . When Ando Bonashee comes downe with the Cabusheir s which are in the country will do my indeavour to purchase what come you were pleased to order . I shall not neglect to procure wood for Agent Brad ley, and could wish that I was capable in serving him more, which shall be my study to endeavour it Pray lett me have a coppy of Mr Hassells accompt as touching your paym ent of the soldiers. At the rate here some have more, some less in sallary , and without cannot make an accompt up right. Here is no trade at all, the gold is gon aboard the Mary, and as you know as long as any shipps to windward the Annamaboe and Agga people are there. 557. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 27 Sept. 1687 This accompanyes Herbert Curry and is to informe you that I have dayly complaints against him by the Cabusheers and people of this place, and is as I understand through liquors and other comodityes which he sells them, and trusting them for it, and in demanding of his debt. They are so unjust as not to pay him, but according to their ways do prendee 79 him for demanding of his right, which in short they are not willing to [allow?] any white man. I have not anything to alledge against him as to the performance of his duty, or civil deportment, only that if he shou ld remayne here, it would be a continuall trouble, in making up the differences which may happen, therefore humbly requesting the ffavour, that there may be no occasion, and as to the men when you have them, and supplyed, desire your consideration as to this place. Pray let me have a bill ofrates for goods, and coppy of Mr Hassells accompt as to the payment of the soldiers. So begging your pardon for this trouble, which I cannot avoyd. 558. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 29 Sept. 1687 Yesterday I gave Mr Walker orders to pay the soldie rs their sallary in good gold. The only exceptious persons were John Pound and Herbert Curry, whom Mr Walker on the refu sall of the gold brought before mee, with the gold. I told them that in my judgement it were verry good, and that if they would depend on their owoe opinion before mine, wee would be tryed by neither, but that they shou ld take the said gold sealed up and goe to Caboe Corsoe, and soe refer to your better judgements, but Curry refused the thing and tooke the gold, the other continued obstinate, and giving mee very absurd language, saying that his covenants with the Royall Company is not fulfilled, and if all men were of his opinion they would lay downe their armes, and lett the Company come here and keep their fforts theirselves, for they have putt a cheat upon men, and if occasion shou ld serve, he would serve them accordingly. The gold which denyed have now sent up, and is the same Mr Walker gave him, haveing sealed these in the presence of most here. Thought not convenient to trouble you with sending him up, have put him in the hole and there shall continue till your further commands. Requesting your favors that there may be some course taken and that there may be noe incouragement for such mutinous fellows, whoe is not to be doubted, if opportunity served, would betray a ffortt. Pray take itt not ill, for itt is realy my thoughts. And your great civillity to Herbert Curry, which he has made his boast of, makes the others more presumtive, and if had a Serjant would ocesion less trouble, and if you approve of Hastings Ingram, who I find to be a sober man, shall by your order make him Serjant, which may be well in keeping better commands and orders. 559. James Walker Annamaboe , 2 Oct. 1687 My humble requests and intreaties are, as there is a vacancie of a seconds place at Accraa , that you will be pleased to lay your comands on me to officieate in the same, and I shall with all diligence and faithfully indeavour to give that satisfaction as may be required, and shall ever acknowledge your great favor in that and others . 560. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 7 Oct. 1687 Since my departure from Cabo Corso, have taken an accompt of the Royall Companys concerns, find all things very well. Have alsoe made an end of [sic] with Mr James Walker from primo to ultimo. The reason J have not sent my accompts is occasioned per multiplicity ofbuisiness in sorting the damaged goods from the good, in order of the purchaseing of come for the same if possible , and bring the Cabusheers to 1 a.per cheste, and Gentelmen lett me te ll you, these are a strange sort of people to deale with. God willing will send my accompts Sunday or Monday next. Gentelmen pray send me on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England, tenn chests sheets, fifty halfe ffirkins tallow, one cask of knives , ff:ifty cases of spirrits, tenn barrells of powder , two caske of palme oyle and two ditto lime, I want the same much. The rest I leave to be discoursed by Mr Walker. 561. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 9 Oct. 1687 Yours of the 8th instant have received, alsoe five hundred and twenty sheets, fifty whole cases of spirritts, thirty halfe ffirkins of tallow, six barrells of powder , one caske ofpalme oyle, and one ditto of lime, for which said goods will in the months accompt give the Royall Company credditt for accordingly , and I am thankfull for supplying the ffactory with what is wanting. I send per Peter the sum of two marks, three angles and five taccoes of good gold, being the ballance of Ffredrickburgh August accompt, also my September accompt at Annamaboe with the ballance , being two ounces, tenn angles , and ffour taccoee's. There having been soe many Dutch interlopers, is the occasion we have noe trade. Ffour ships at a time has been in the roade , besides Thomas Towers . Gentlemen you will find the dashees given for settling and the liberty for rebuilding this ffactory has been only in brandy and rumme, which formerly was in says, perpetuanoes and other goods. Have after some trouble a grant to receive the Companys gunn, which Mr Hassell gave the Cabusbeers, and tomorrow will send for it. A ffactory is better once well settled than troublesome dayly, and doe ashure you it has not cost mee little liquor. Have sent John Teage with four iron barrs, in order that if you please the smith may make what is wanting. Ditto Teage has the dimentions of each. Here is hardly a window that will hang on thier hinges, being all rotten , therefore pray let mee have some deale boards, or elce be pleased to order the carpenter to make windows at Cabo Corso, some coming per this canoe. 562. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 13 Oct. 1687 Yours of the I 0th instant received , and have according to your order altered my accompts, which comes per bearer. Have also received one caske of knives no.202, containing one hundred and one dozen, for which will give the Royall Company credditt for. 563. James Nightingale Anna[ma]boe, 26 Oct. 1687 Inclosed is two letters from Mr Whiting, whoe ordered me to send fo1ward with speed.80 Alsoe desire your answer, which you will be pleased to direct to me, by reason his canoe is here and stays for an answer. 564. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 26 Oct. 1687 Yours received. ln answer to what you write, I once more dow solemly protest before the Allmighty God, that I never saw the man you write for, only as formerly by mine the 22d instant, twas by desire of Captain Coffee, and Jett him be who he will that hath told you to the contrary, has told abominable untruth, for hav e never had the man in my custody, as have made appeare in the presence of the whole garrison, and Mr Elwes boy by name Eggin, and that before Captain Coffees face, as per a letter written to Mr Elwes to that purpose. I have proffered a great deale to procure the man, which is at Anisham , in order that you may know the tmth, and more then that as soon as I can procure, Captain Coffee will secure him till your [= you are] sattisfied. As to the Royall Companys concemes to make up my accompts, pay the ballance and come up my self, shall be observed, or what elce in soe, [you] will be pleased to command me. 565. James Nightingale Anna[ma]boe , 30 Oct. 1687 Some days agoe sent you some letters of Mr Whitings at Accraa, who ordered me to keep the canoe here till such time you were pleased to send an answer. This is therefore to desire you will be pleased to Jett me know whether you will send, or have already. Alsoe Jett me humbly begg you will send the Doctor here for a day or two, am very much troubled with vomiting, and that together with my rupture troubles me soe much that am not able to stand. I hope you will grant my request. 566. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 3 Nov. 1687 Yours of primo instant received, and doe send per bearer my October accompts , with the ballance of the same, being mk2: 4: 4: =. I give you humble and hearty thanks for your kind proffer of assistance what Cabo Corsoe can afforde , for which are much obliged and hope to recompence the same with my good service. Gentlemen you will be pleased to excuse my coming to Cabo Corso , its not disobeying your commands, but in reallity as followeth. In the first place I am not well in health. Secondly the natives here are all in arm es, and our ffort wall is not above four foot high and some places downe. I have ever since my being here, as per your order of the 8th September to put the ffort in as good a repaire as possible, I have don my endeavors and have compleated .of the wall , and that 14 ffoot high. Chancellor 81 and others plainly tells me that when they please they can take our ffort, which troubles mee dayly to heare. Therefore pray if possible lett me have some white men , alsoe four men, two weomen slaves , only for 14 days , in order to gett the wall up, for intend towards the watter side to make the gate , which is more secure. You would admire what trouble and charge dayly I am at to keep the Companyes ffort and concemes in good being , which doubt not as long as I am here shall be keep! soe. I am forced to send this by a two hand canoe, by reason there is noe passage by land, in which canoe pray send the windows, nailes and what elce was ordered for this place. Want also some lime and a caske oftarris for the tank, wl1icb is quite out of repaire , and some sheet lead for the gutters, and when your leasure wiJI permitt pray send me some says, and a baile of the redd Guynea stuffs, all on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Last n~ght came here ambassador[s] from Ffetue about settling Ahen , but he refused there propositions . 82 Intends with Fantene people to fight Ffetue about 8 or 10 days hence, and to that intent Captain Eggin, who is Generall, with the Cabusheers goes to the Braffoe and Coranteers to gett their people in readiness as well as here. 83 When I hear the ce1tainty more of the thing, will advise. 567. Thomas Johnson Annamaboe , 9 Nov. 1687 This accompanies Mr Nightingale, in the 7 hand canoe. Upon the rece ipt of yours [he] received me kindly, and this morning hath locked up the warehouse, and will not seale it. He hath brought the key with him, and left in possession [myself]. 568. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 18 Nov. 1687 I humbly desire you would be pleased to send me per first on accompt Royall Affrican Company ten chests of sheets, and one case of says. All is well here. 569. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 22 Nov. 1687 Yours of the 21th instant received, and am thankfull in sending Doctor Wolber, for severall men here are troubled with Guinea distempers. Shall use him according as shall meritt , I being sensible he was sent out by the Royall Company. Am ve1y well satisfied, if you had the goods write for, you would have sent them. The gold came to me first, but I having none, sent them to Mr Cross with the gold. Its all one where the Company takes there gold, yet a great difference in the charge of each Factory. Shall purchase what corne you are pleased to order at the price mentioned. Also have on receipt of yours sent John Teague to Annishan, to keep the Royall Company possession at that place, and will with the assistance of the natives, hinder the French landing or coming ashore, if should attempt it.84 Have paid John Pound his sallary and canky money and took his receipt, and per this canoe comes up, he and John Todd. 570. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 23 Nov. 1687 This accompanyes James Cunduit, which sent to give you an accompt what is wanting to repaire the canoe at Amersa. I understand the people at Annishan begins to play the rogue, which sent John Teague away yesterday, but sent him back againe, after I had discoursed with Coffee. I as yett heare nothing. This morning when doe, will give an accompt per express. 571. James Nightingale Annnamaboe, 24 Nov. 1687 Since my last per James Cunduit, came here the Cabush iers from Annishan, with Captain Coffie, who told me that they were ordered per the Quarrantiers , and the Cabushier ofCaesuckam ,85 to tell me that without you send a white man with the Royall Company goods to reside there, as formerly , they would dispose of the Royall Companys interest and gunns at Annishan. They desire your answer per first, what you intend to do, and if not come suddenly , they will tume the white man away, and go on board the Ffrench shipp86 to effect their designs. I desire you would be pleased to order me, or who you shall please to appoint, what you please to do in the thing. In short they are rogues, and want but an oppertunity. This is in short the real! truth , which is my duty to advise timely. Pray send some white men if possible, Thaving no more than four that are good, and if can, pray let one be a carpenter to mend the guns carriages. Really wee are very week here. 572. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 1 Dec. 1687/ 8 [sic] Yours of the 26th past have received, and have done my endeavours according to your orders concerning Annishan. Have sent Herbert Currey instead of John Teague, he being more sober. The Cabushiers and Quarranteers are still for goods and without the same, say they will certainly dispose off the Royall Companyes intrest at that place , and Gentlemen they are not to be trusted. They have seat to Mr Du Cass to the effect.87 I humbly desiJe you will be pleased to send on account [of the] Royall African Company of England, some powder, perpetuanoes, sheets, says, rum, andl palme oyle. For want of the same Mr Crosse tooke gold for his this morning , coming to me first, and there is a greate deale of difference in the charges of each Factory, which pray please to consider. In a day or two will send my monthly accoounts. 573. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 4 Dec. 1687 Both yours dated the 3d instant received, with 25 perpetuanoes blew, 25 ditto green, 390 sheets, six barrel ls of powder, and 165 gallons of rum, fourewhite men, all on account of the Royall African Company, for which said goods will give them credditt accordingly. Yesterday before the first letter came to hand saw a shipp come to an anchor at Annishan, the natives telling me it was Captain Emanuel Burdis. I seeing the boate goeing ashoare, sent imeadiately Hansicoe to see what newes there , but coming told me there were French men, whereupon ordered all Annamaboe people to come to armes , and goe along with me to Annishan, but before gott thither, received the letter, which came in good time . The Cabushiers of Annishan understanding our coming sent the French men all away with their boate. I went with all Annamaboe people in the Factory and ordered the soldiers to ffire three vollues under the Royall Companys fflagg in deffiance of any French to settle there, although they have liberty of Annishan people. 88 But in short the thing is thus, that with much adoe have gott a promise, with condition the Royall Company, or you Gentlemen in their behalfes, will send goods and rebuild [ms. 'rubuild'] the Factory, noe nation whatsoever shall settle there, and without that they are resolved to dispose off Annishan to the French , having already been conditioning about it, but where[ = were] at present hindred, understanding my coming there. They say they will stay for your answeare till Munday night or Tuesday morning and noe longer, and with much adoe gott that promise of them, and in reallity , if not send goods and resettle your iutrest will be lost. This is the reall truth and my duty to advise timely , therefore desire your order against the appointed time. Inclosed comes my November accounts with the ballance, being two ounces, two angles and eight taccooes. The two duplicates will send per first. I humbly desire you! be pleased that I may purchase come for all the damaged goods, for now is the time, before ships come downe. Pray be so kind as to to send some musquetts, swoards and bandeliers for our white men, a balbe1i, and a carpenter for six dayes to mend the gun carriages. 574. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 5 Dec. 1687 Yours of yesterdays date last night I received , and this morning early sent for Captain Coffee and the Cabushiers from Annishan, and fully discoursed them, in what relates to the Royall Companys intrest and affaires in that place. They are very well satisfied with your resolution in not suffering the French to settle , since you have promised to doe it yourselves , but by all meanes send downe some goods to morrow before the Curranteers comes , for I feare elce these rogues will fall from their words , for they doe as good as tell me soe. There is a house ready for the reception of the goods. In the interim shall take what care I can till your further order. [PS] Captain Coffee tells me that the Dutch sent him word that if wee did not settle at Annishan they would , before the French should have it. I sent them word that wee was as able to doe it as they, and that wee had done it already. 575. James Nightingal e & William Cross Annamaboe , 7 Dec. 1687 Yours of the 6th instant have received , and this morning Captain Coffee and the Cabushiers have been with us, and they have agreed to send up a mann tomorrow to treate with you about the affairs of Annishan , at Cabo Corso Castle. I have sent there according to order some goods, and lay'd before them what you have mentioned in your severall letters, with which they seeme very well satisfied. 576. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 8 Dec. 1687/8 [sic] This accompanys one of the Cabushiers according to order of the 6th instant. The French shipp sayled yesterday to leeward. I sent to Annishan five blew perpetua.noes, five ditto green, ten course sletias, and thirty two Guynea stuffs, all good goods. 577. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 9 Dec. 1687/8 Captain Coffee with the Cabushiers of Armishan are here, and tells me that the Braffo of Consockum has ordered that [it] you doe not send more goods and a white man at Annishan, they will send yours away. I am credibly informed that the French are about setling at Tantan Querry ,89 Ladjue,90 Winibo and Barricoe,91 all belonging to the Royall Compaoy. 92 Soe Gentlemen you know best what to doe in this thing. Here are five greate ships in sight about Amersa but as yett know not what they are, when doe will advise. I desire you will be pleased to send me back the list of the three French ships, which comes inclosed.93 Our sloope is in the roade, but the Master is not yett come ashoare.94 Our Cabushiers begin their old tricks, with much adoe I can keepe them in quietness. All things are well, God be praised , at both the Facto1yes. [PS] The shipps in sight are Frenchmen. In hast. 578. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 11 Dec. 1687 Yours of the 9th instant received, and have told Captain Coffee and the Cabushiers of Annishan what you ordered me. The Currantyer is not yett come downe. The French went ashoare at Amersa with the :flagg and flagg stafe, in order off their setling. I sent imeadiatly some rum to the Cheife there to hinder their designe, yett thaye have incognito sent to the Currantyers and Braffo of that place to settle there , and their cheife article they stand upon, is not to suffer any nation to purchase oyster shells but themselves, yett their flagg is gone aboard againe. Inclosed is a letter from Mr Whiteing at Accraa, who desired me to send forward per express.95 579. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 12 Dec. 1687 This accompanyes the Mate of Captain Simon Shears, who will give you account of their affaires. Likewise is come ashoare one Captain Joseph Andrewes, Comander of one of the Royall Companys shipps bound for Old Callabar. 96 The French are still at Amersa. 580. James N ightingale Annamaboe, 14 Dec. 1687 Yours of the 12th instant have received, and ihad before that time put on board the Mary 100 sticks of wood from Annishan on AgentBradlys account, also 150 ctitto on account of the Royall African Company at Annamaboe , as per receipt at the months end will appeare. Will undoubtedly observe the motion of the French, and hinder if possible their setling at Arnersa. The reason was Captain James stayd yesterday, because his long boate fetcht water .97 Have sent on the Royall Companyes account 18 pewter juggs. 581. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 17 Dec. 1687 This is to advise you that the sloope is departed from Amersa with 60 butts of oystershells, aJJd have hindred the French of setling there, per the Braffo, Eggin and upland people, although the Quarrantier of Annishan put it on ffoote, as likewise his son Gauguning at Winaboe. 98 Since the Mary departed from hence am informed that about Tanton Querry she mett with a French man ofwarr, 99 and there past severall guns between them at night and the next day day, hope it may prove salutes. 100 Have the same information from Amersa. Pray be pleased to sent on account Royall Company some sletias course , lead barrs, tallow in halfes firkins good pewter juggs, one pound pewter basons , with some lime and tarris . Captain Coffee sent to me the Companyes stick to know if it was you r order. I sent word whatever he did be should waite on you imeadiately, and obey order. 582. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 20 Dec. 1687 Yours of the 19th instant i;eceived, also forty course sletias, fifty halfe firkins of tallow , one hundred lead barrs, two hundred one pound and fifty foure pound pewter basons, for which said goods will give the Roya ll Company credditt accordingly. I am thankful! in sending me a second, whome I will treate with all civility imaginable, and shall procure the wood according to order. Likewise, waite upon you at Christmas , and obey what further comands you shall be pleased to lay upon [JN]. 583. James N ightinga le Annamaboe, I Jan. 1687/8 This is to desire you will be pleased to send me for account of the Royall Afr ican Company of England &ca two hundred iron barrs, a halfe peece ofred and a halfe peece of scarlett cloath, two cask of lime, two caske of tarris, one hogshead of brandy, some coller bandeliers, or cattuch [= cartouche] boxes . Tomorrow you will receive James Cundy , in whose place pray send James Levandelo. Not elce at present , but wish you all a happy New Yeare. 584. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 2 Jan. 1687/ 8 Yours of this date have received , alsoe one hundred iron barrs, eleven yards of red cloth, eleven and a halfe yards of scarlett cloth, twelve screw' d juggs, fifty seaven gallons of brandy per content, for which said goods shall give the Company credditt accordingly . Doubt not but shall purchase the come ordered with those goods which are not vendable for gold, as much as possible. Have likewise received six cattouch boxes , and doubt not when occasions present but that you will furnish me with lime and tarris, which is realy much wanted for our tank. Captain Cowley is dispatcht from hence with his come andwood. I will send Mr Cross tomorrow my canoe, canoe men and slaves fordispatch of Captain Cowley. 585. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 9 Jan. 1687/8 I send per bearer my monthly accounts for December 1687 with the ballance of the same, being five ounces, five angles and four taccooes and a halfc. I can expect noe trade here, there being two Factoryes suppl yed with goods, one to windward andanoth er to leeward of me,101 yett I between both am at the charge, by comers andgoers in drinking of brandy, and in reality have been at a more charge to the nativesof Annishan, Amersa , and upland people. Mr Cross can give an account as havecharged in my accounts. The two hundred chest of come have delivered to Captain Cowley, but tookenoe rece ipt, and he goeing away suddenly, have not gott the receipt for the wood,yett have sent an attestation for your better satisfaction. 586. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 19 Jan. 1687/8 Yours of the 1gth instant received , also three hundred and ninety sheets, onehundred iron barrs, eighty eight dosen home hafted knives, and ten whole barrells of powder , for which said goods shall give the Royall Compan y creddittaccordi ngly, and dispatch the sloope with wood, it being ready to put on board. 587. James Nightingale & William Cross Annamaboe, 30 Jan. 1687/8 Yours of the same date came this day to our hands, which wee have perused withthe precautioned secreacie but upon mature deliberation, thinke is not safe for usto seize on his 102 books or papers before a better oppcrtunity presents, forunderhand he carrys himselfe slyly to the Blacks, by feeding them with brandyand other dashes, that noe longer then fourteen days agoe my Serjeant had like tohave been carried per force out of the Castle, and abused, and all this through his meanes and procurement , and should wee now attempt any thing are afraid thesame or a worse inconveinience would follow, besides he has packed up all his things, expecting to goc up to Cabo Corsoe Castle, and ifthere is any thing private,he is cunning enough to convey it another way. He is soe greate with the nativesthat should he continue here long, upon a fair oppertunity I verily beleeve he would betray the Fort. This is what wee can say at present, only upon the firstconveiniencie shall use our endeavours to execute your commands. 588. James Nightingale & William Cross Annamaboe , Primo Feb. 1687/8 Yours Ultimo January have received , and are sorry that wee gave you an occasion of offence , and that you should thinke wee dare presume to disobey your orders, for if you are pleased to peruse againe what wee wrote before, you will find our proposalls are as much for the advantage for the Royall African Companyes intrest, as your jealousie is to the contrary, for that and the security of this place is onely what wee designed . Gentlemen , wee are troubled that you should tell us of a joynt confederacy with Doctor Woolber. What you have wlfitt upon suposition will be thought real! when it comes to the African House, 103 soe pardon us if wee justifie ourselves, for farr be it from either of us to have any such thoughts as to be concerned with him, or any body elce, in things of that nature, and soe wee hope you will interpret it. Last night wee tooke our oppertunity, and have seized upon all Doctor Woolbers bookes and papers, and safely sealed them up, and by this conveyance sent them to you. He had not the least suspicion of our intentions , soe certainely nothing was conveyed away, onely wish this had been done the night before, but knowing you to be as good as greate, hope you will be pleased to excuse us this time, and then Jett come what will come, wee shall most readily execute your comands. 589. James Nightingale Annamabo e, 6 Feb. 1687/8 I send my January account per bearer with the ballance of the same, being one marke, two ounces, thirteen angles and nine taccooes in gold . The traders were afraid to come, here occasioned by dayly pallavering concerning Aben , 104 which is the reason they went to Agga. I have sent to the Arcanys to procure the same at this place, and some of their merchants are come here. I doubt not but shall have a good trade in a little time, the merchants shall not want encouragement. Pray be pleased to send me on account of the Roya ll African Company a quantity of blew and green perpetuanoes, says Guyny stuffs , sheets if you can spare them or be at Cabo Corsoe. 590. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 9 Feb. 1687/8 I gave you an account of the 6th instant that I had brought the Arcanie merchants downe hither, therefore pray send me some goods formerly writt for, or as many as you can spare of them. Also send some iron barrs, for tbe merchants stayes here onely for goods. 591. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 15 Feb. 1687 /8 Just now received per express this inclosed letter from Mr Whiting, who writes me that the inclosed is of greate matters of concemes relating to the Royall Companys affaires. 1os Both your last letters shall answeare per first, being this morning beusy in putting come aboard of Captain Batherne. 592. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 16 Feb. 1687/8 Yours of the 10th and 14th instant have received. Your orders not to dispo se of iron barrs for come shall be observed , but please to understand that a greate many of them are the remaines before Mr Thelwalls time, as per publique inventory taken, and are most eaten up with rust. Concerning the remaines in my last monthly account [they] are realy true, and it hath been my method and shall be to keep my accounts and the warehouse to agree , and hope you have not found it hitherto to the contrary , and Gentlemen I cannot help that there is noe more gold returned , the charge being soe greate both in payments of soldiers , slaves and other concernes for the Royall Company , which my neighbouring Factors are not concerned withall, which occasions soe small a retume, which pray be pleased to consider , and if you be pleased to conjecture what dayly trouble I am at here with these people [it] would tyer a mans heart out. I have already delivered on board Captain Batbernes shipp 92 chests of good come , as per his receipts will appeare. Shall purchase for the Royall Company 300 chests ordered , as soone as possible. Have sent per bearer five ounces of gold belonging to the estate of Mr Walker, and would have done it before if have had your order , which now I see is sufficient , but noe other single person which first demanded it [was sufficient]. Just now arrived a letter from Captain Vagoner, 106 who advices me that Mr Fensmen at Accra 107 ordered him to sayJe upon receipt to ditto place, being also desired by the Generali of the Mina. 593. James Nightingale Annamaboe , 18 Feb. 1687/8 This comes per express to give you an accompt that last night Aben and all Fanteen people are gon to Saboe, 108 to joyn with the King of ditto place, with an absolute resolution to fight Fetue. 109 Eggin comands as chief, and its thought they are very strongh , and tells me 5400 men, besides the traine. In short there is not a Cabushier or a man left that is able to carry arms. The Generali of the Mina is very buissy in the concemes . 110 Pray send me some slaves, what are here are sick, and are continually running away, since they see the former are not yet returned. I have but one man, one woman, which are not able to keep the Castle with wood for our people . I likewise begg a coppy of your orders at your gates of Cabo Corso, that I may accordingly keep our people with their order to their duty. Am much troubled with them, playing the rogue dayly, from the highest to the lowest , and do what they please. Pray excuse my writing, am somewhat sickly. 594. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 23 Feb. 1687/8 This morning I received a letter from Mr Whiting with the inclosed, 111 and also another from Captain Waggoner , who intends to sayle for Europe in few days, therefore pray send your letters with all speed, and be pleased to Jett the canoe call in here, because I would send a letter to my father, having received one from him per the last Dutch shipp. This being sent per express, there being no passage by land. The Braffoe ofFanteen hath been dead this six days, and Captain Eggin will succeed him.112 They will not let the vulgar people know it until! Ahen's designe is effected. Pray send me what I desired in my last Jetter. 595. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 28 Feb. 1687/8 1 send per bearer my monthly account with the ballance of the same, being the sum of mk.2=5= 12=7. You will perceive per ditto account what CWTant goods are wanting, which if you please to send, the Royall Company shall have credditt for them accordingly. Pray Gentlemen send me a Black carpenter and a mason for 10 days, with some nail es and small staples for doores and windows , also 3 hogsheads of lyme, and 2 ditto of tarris, to repayre the flanker, platforme and tanke, for they are all crackt in severa ll places, insoemuch that I am afrayd they will tumble downe without a sudden repayre, wee having had here a great deale of rayne. Also be pleased to grant me the slaves which you were pleased to promise, at my being at Cabo Corso, and humbly begg a coppy of your orders at the gate ofCabo Corso, in order to keep our people, upon their duty. In reality ifl should fall sick, here are so many comanders, that it would occasion a great deale of trouble and ill conveniency at this place. Sha I I not insist any further on this particular, but hope to keep that good comand you have been pleased to give, with all civility imaginable, as hope you have not heard to the contrary. 596. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 3 March 1687/8 Yours of the 29th February and accounts received, with an order to rectifie the same. Gentlemen be pleased to consider what people I have to deale withall, that never did nor will keep their promises nor words, but to the contrary impose new bu1ihens upon him that is most kind to them, and they thinke it is because he dare not do otherwise to them, for there hath been formerly so much granted by my predecessors that scarce any thing can safely be denied, which pray be pleased to consider. I do assure you if had not pay'd for the building of the wall, which is effected, it would have occasioned a great deale of charge and troubl e more than it hath don. And if! should give you an account of al I transactions wee are under here, it would be endeless to write, and put Mr Boy lston to a great deale of trouble, and litle satisfaction. As to the iron barr and one sheet [it] hath been really disbursed for Factorys use, and for the halfe barrell of powder and eight gallons of rum, [it] is really paid to Fantee n army. It hath cost me one anchor of brandy, four lead baITs and a half barrel of powder and other necessaryes on my own particular account, and yet they are not contented. Concerning the canoe, I do protest before God it did never belong to me, but on the contrary to a Negroe, by name Dominee. And Gentlemen since I have been on the Coast, what a Factor really could make appeare to have disbursed on Companyes account, as I have don, bas been allowed, which humbly begg you will be pleased to grant me, and to consider in what place I am, where neither is satisfaction for the Master, but on the contrary intolerable dayly affords and charges to their servants. Do not presume to insist upon old methods, but on the contrary leave my self wholly and solely to your discretion, and humbly begg you will be pleased to consider and allow the aforementioned charges, being really disbursed on Company account as is before mentioned. 597. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 3 March 1687 /8 Yours of the 3dinstant received . Shall only say that 1send my February accounts rectified according to order, also the ballance of the same, being three markes, eight angles and seaven taccoes. The carpenter wants two of the biggest sparrs for the hall at Annamaboe, or elce all will tumble downe, a hand screw, one hundred tenn penny nailes and two hundred smaller in sorts , for the doores , windows and hinges. The great canoe is here from Accra. The canoemen being weary cannot padle against the wind but will be at Cabo Corso in the morning. Clements has given me the letters, which comes inclosed. Pray send the slave back, here is not one man slave in the Castle. 598. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 8 March 1687 /8 Yours of the 7th instant with two sparrs and one hogsheadd of tarris and a hand screw have received, and alsoe the two men slaves which formerly run away, for which I thanke you. Per returne of the 9 hand canoe comes up Doctor Wolber according to orders, who is a very troublesome fellow and puts more confidence in a Black man then in a White, and hath had of late w:iththem severall ganglins [= janglings] 113 and quarrells continually to and fro about the Castle, that it makes me very uneas ey, and indeed am not fond of his company, without you will be pleased to give such orders that he may keep himselfe in that station that he is in and not to keepe any correspondencies with any Black here at Annamaboe. He hath trnsted them with much goods and monyes , which they now have cheated him of, which is the occasion of the continuall dispute. Docter Walber tells me that his agreement was with the Company for fifty pounds per anno for his diett, as he will showe you per his papers at Cabo Corsoe Castle, which you have been pleased likewise formerly to allow him at Accra and alsoe here at Annamaboe. I humbly desire you will be pleased to send on account of the Royall African Company of England vizt sayes, sheets, perpetuanoes , blew and green, iron barrs, for what is remaining here is the very refuge[= refuse] of what was left in Mr Thelwalls time. I shall likewise want (when your keele [= kill] is burnt) three hogsheads of lime and some bricks and more tarris , and a bricklayer , ffor the fflanker doth crack in severall places, and the tanck and plattfo1me is much out of repaire. [PS] The duplicates of February accounts shall be sent per first. 599. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 15 March 1687 /8 The carpenter being here wants 100 6 penny and JOO 2 penny nailes more [for] Factoryes use. Likewise I desire you would be pleased to let the carpenter stay here till Saturday, in order to mend the canoe which canyed oystershells, for here is no(t] a canoe to be gott, if shipps should be order[ d] downe for come. 600. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 17 March 1687/8 14th & 16thYours of the instant received. In answer to the l 8 1 is that I have delivered to Captain Buttram his complement of as good com e as ever was shipt aboard. Am likewise satisfied in your orders concerning Doctor Wolbers dyett , for which I shall give the Company credditt in this months accompt. The next morning after the receipt of yours, sent Mr Johnson to Captain Eggin, and to the Cabushiers up in the countrey, in order to provide some come. They understanding that there are many ships on the Coast, do pretend that come is both very deare and and scarce, so I can give you no certainty. In short could not purchase one chest since my last remaynes. I understand that they do designe to raise it to two angles a chest, and to be payd in good says. Notwithstanding shall follow your former orders, with what goods I have if possible. Have sent likewise the Generali of the Minas letter (in your inclosed) to Mr Everaas 114 upon the receipt. Wee are ready to assist Captain Buttram with six good guns, if occasion shall require. 115 The Companyes money, and his owne, is at present in the warehouse. Here are severall soldiers sick and lame. Be pleased to order Doctor Mackdowall to send some bresilicum 116 and plastering, Doctor Wolber has lockt up all his things, and has left no plasters for the men. [PS] Pray be pleased to send me some paper , for indeed this is the last sheet. 601. James Nightingale Anamaboe, 19 March 1687/8 By report of the Negroes the French shipp hath received advice of the gold being put ashore, and that Captain Buttram hath assistance of men , was the occasion of preventing their fighting, which otherwise might have been expected. 117 The French shipp at this interim past by without showing any colours. I shall send a messenger on board the Portuguez , to get a further account of the Ffrenc h man, and shall advise you if needful). Pray be pleased to order what shall don with the gold chest, whether it shall be delivered on board Captain Buttram or sent up to Cabo Corso. Pray be pleased to send me some paper , for indeed I have nothing to write upon. 602. James Nightingale Annamaboe, 20 March 1687 /8 This accompanies Nathan Pile, whom sent up to you. Pray be pleased to send some lyme, and taiTis, and if you can a bricklayer, for the flankers and walls are very much out of repayre, as per an account at large you shall have of the bearer. 603. James Nightingale Anamaboe, 25 March 1688 Yours of the 24th instant have received , and Ile assure you the last monthly remaynes is true. The reason of not present delivery to Captain Buttram his complement of come, is that by reason of great quantityes of come lying to gather I thought it fitt to order the come to be kept in its teers [= tiers], for the better preservation ofit from buggs and weavels. The ware [ = war] coming on, it cannot presently be brought in. I sent my second up to that purpose for the forwarding it home, which is as sure as as if it were in the warehouse ( only for the present). I am now dispatch ing Captain Buttram. I do not want come for him, although I did instant to his mate of what you write. Understanding by him, that the Captain is very we ll provided with beans and other Negroe provitions, therefore for the surety and sooner dispach of other shipps, proposed it to him. For the better dispatch of Captain Sturt, pray be pleased to order him to take the rest of his come in at Agga, of Mr Cross. In the interim shall forward home the rest of the come , which is dayly coming. You yourselves know that no Black is punctuall to his word to a day or teen[ = ten]. That and the ware hath been the principall reason of my not being ready. There is uothing of what is aforementioned, or other cases, but that I have at all times acted the Companyes best interest, which never shall be wanted in me. If chance I shall be disapointed in which I have don for the good of the come, I have money ready to purchase come, therefore pray be not offended for the present disapointment, be assured that shall be ready in a very short time. 604. James Nightinga le Anamaboe, 26 March 1688 Captain Buttram being dispatch yesterday by nine of the clock with his come, I ordered Hukamee to retume to Cabo Corso with his canoe. At his being here, he continually idles away his time, and no persuading him to retume, staying here expecting Captain Buttrams dashey, and being continually up in the towne, am afraid of some ill to attend him and the rest of the canoemen, having enough to do to keep them in peace. Shall endeavour to dispatch Captain Sturt as soon as possible, the sea being very high. Hope he shall want litle of his complement, if any at all, the rest shall be brought in with all speed possible in the Factory. There shall be nothing wanting in me. 605. James Nightingale Anamaboe , 27 March 1688 This is to give you an account that I have ship't on board the shipp Expedition, Captain Sturt Coman der, one hundred sixty three chests of very good come, as per the inclosed doth appeare. 118 There shall be no neglect in me to gett the rest in (which is in teers) as soon as possible. All the people being in the countrey is the onely hinderance to get it in so suddenly. This night all the men were forced out of the towne to the army, only some few fishermen. Gentlemen at the decease of the Braffo of this countrey have been forced ( otherwise could not live in quietness) to give towards his funeral] these goods on account of the Company, vizt one brawle, two sheets, one damaged allejar, one quarter barrell of powder, and eight gallons of rum, which I hope you will be pleased to allow in this months account, having really paid the same. [PS] The other inclosed will show that Captain Buttram is also fully satisfied, although his huffing mate writt otherwise, and put you to a misunderstanding of me, and am sorry that you are so continuall misinformed of me, which always proves to the contrary. 606. James Nightingale Anamaboe, Ultimo March 1688 Yours of the 281h instant received, and observe what you allow for the Braffo's ftmerall, which shall charge accordingly. As to Doctor Wolber, in short he is more a beast than a Christian, and has so many tricks that he is able to set up all by the ears, and mine all the Royall Companys concernes here, or any where elce, without he be kept under, and if you Gentlemen did but see the hundredth part of his moross and unbecoming actions, you would not blame me, nor any in that station you were pleased to put me in, to keep him under a good and lawfull comand, as hitherto have don, and Gentlemen you yourse lves are sensible of his tricks at Caho Corso, Accra, aboard the Mary, and since his last coming downe. Had like to bring a great difference between Mr Everars and my selfe per his repotts, which after a strict examina tion found to be falce, before all our garrison. I am afi:ayd that one time or another he will occasion great trouble per the Blacks, ifnot betray the ffort. Have not received any come, all the people are with Captain Eggin and[ = at] Saboe. I intend to go there tomorrow, in order to have come brought downe as soon as possib le, I find that sending of others signified nothing. I humbly begg you will be pleased to have patience till I can get it in. If the people were downe could soon be supplyed with a great deale of ease, which hope you will be pleased to grant. Should without writing let Mr Cross have the 5 hand canoe, for wee always let one another have what wee want. Have sent Dr W olber this morning to Agga, The old Gentleman there is very sick. 607. James Nightingale Anamaboe, 2 April 1688 Yours of this date have received. The boy brought it to me about three a clock this aftemoone, and upon receipt I immediately dispatcht it on board Captain Barratt, and received the inclosed for answer, which comes express. 119 608. James Nightingale Anamaboe, 7 April l 688 Yours of the 3dinstant per Mr Ronan have received, and your orders to him, Mr Bloome, 120 and Mr Johnson have observed. I have sent per Mr Ronan my accompt to the primo Aprill, which was in the warehouse before wee tooke an inventory, but for the better satisfact ion, have made two accompts beginning ultimo Marc h and ending 4th Aprill, which agrees with the remaynes at this Factory, only the come, which shall be in the Factory within 6 or 8 days. I have been yesterday in the countrey in order to have it brought downe. The rest leave to the personall discourse of Mr Ronan. 609. James Nightinga le Anamaboe, 21 April 1688 I humbly desire you would be pleased to send me, on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of Eng land, some sheets, says, knives, blew and green perpetuanoes, Guynea stuffs, sletias fine, for dayly people come and ask for them. I am troubled with the Quarrantiers, they demand two cases of spiritts for the planting their come. Our Cabushiers at this place likewise they will not let me alone till they have it. 