VII EGYA The RAC factory at Egya ('Agga'), east of Anomabu, had been occupied, apparently continuously, since the 1670s. It supplied gold, com for the provision.ing of slave ships, and some slaves. As at Anashan and Anomabu, the hinterland traders bringing gold to Egya were the Akani. Like Anashan and Anomabu, Egya belonged to the state of Fante, and the factory periodically had dealings with the 'Braffo' of Fante. The Egya corre.spondence throws further light on Fante's relations with its neighbours, including its war with Agona in 1687 (nos 651 etc.) and its projected invasion ofFetu, in support of the exiled chief' Aben', in I 688 (nos 656 etc.). 610. Theophilus Blinsham Agga, 8 March 1686 Your Worships letter 6th ditto I have received, giveing account of 4 chest of sheets for this factory. When received shall give the Royall Company creddit, desireing your Worshjp to order me the goods as underwriting on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England, also pray that those goods I writte for now may be good, to encourage trade, this factory being in great hopes of gaining a trade. Also pray your Worship to give an order to Mr Nightingale 1 to veiw the com [which] was bought by Francis Nixson. Pray your Worships order for what come I shall buy, for the account of the Royall Company of England, and also the prizes of goods in generall, per first. 20 broad pintadoes; 160 gallons rum; l O cases of spirits; 200 iron barrs; 20 course sletias; 1 cask knives; IO chests sheets; 1 cask of2 pound basons; 1 ditto 3 [pound] basons; 1 ditto of I pound ditto; 6 screwd juggs. Pray your Worship to send me the Company prizes for slaves. 611. Theophilus Blinsham Agga , 14 March 1686 My last to your Worship was of the 11th ditto , which was retum'd me per James Bai!y.2 I received a letter of the 9th ditto with the prizes of the Companyes goods, wanting the prizes of the birds eye carpitts, paper brawles , Guine stuffes . Have also received the goods from on board the sloop , and haveing given the Royall Company creditt . Have laden on board the same sloop forty chest of good come oo the account of the Royall Affrican Company of England, the receipt of which shall be sent your Worship with my monthly account. In mine to your Worship of the 8th November prayd your Worship to send twenty course sletias, twenty broad tapseiles on the account and resque [ = risk] of the Royall Affrican Company of England , and if you would be pleased to send thirty or forty Turky carpitts on the same account , I understand that Mr Nightingale has many damnified Turky carpitts undisposed of. Also pray your Worship to give order to Mr Nightingale to veiw the come of Francis Nixon , the rome of which would be very usefull to me . The sayes that I advised your Worship of, desireing the price, gi veing account they came from Mr Whiting at Accra 3 to Cabo Corso [ and] affter sent Mr Nightingale to be disposed of, which sayes Mr Nightingale hath since sent for and are delivered , begging your Worships pardon for the trouble gave. 612. Theophilus Blinsham Agga , 27 March 1686 Your Worships letter of the 26th ditto is received and a baile of fifty stript carpitts . I have this day sent your Worship per canoe a man slave on the account and resque of the Royall Atfrican Company of England , for which desire your Worships receipt. The slave is tawl [ = tall] and hath eight white rings on his arme and some of his haire is cutt from his head to his crown that your Worship may the better know the slave that l sent from Mr Nightingales . If your Worship please to give me leave shall waite upon your Worship with my monthly account and give what account I can of this place . 613. John Wortley Agga , 30 April 1686 I have received by the 11 hand canoe those goods your Worship sent to Agga, but most of them prove very much damaged, vizt 60 broad blew bafts, 30 whereof is very much worm eaten; 40 green perpetuanoes , 20 much damnified; 140 dozen knives not yett opened. I have likewise by your Worships order sent up by the canoe the 2 cases that the bafts and perpetuanoes came in. I doe intend about the begining of this next week to [send] your Worships up my monthly account begining at the last of March and ends the last of Aprill. 614. John Wortley Agga, 1 May 1686 Here inclosed is my account for month and the ballance is 2mk 6oz 6a I.ta [and) another for the Company with the ballance thereof, which I hope will find acceptance at your Worships hands, without errors. I have made bold to send your Worship six green birds by the bearer hereof Mr Bryan Ingle, which I hope will deliver them safe to your hands. I desire your Worship be pleased to send me some paper and quills &ca. I will doe the best endeavour to serve the Company, and for their best advantage, which is my utmost endeavour. 615. Theophilus Blinsham Agga, 14 May 1686 Att my comeing to Aggal made demand of the factory, which Mr Wortley denyd, haveing a positive order from your Worship and Councell so to take possession thereof and keep tell farther orders from the said, therefore I humbly desire your Worships pleasure in sending me one contradictory to that, at receipt of whic h will be delivered into the charge of [Theophilus Blinsham]. PS. I being present when demand[ed] the factory, pray your Worships answer upon receipt. JN [= James Nightingale]. 616. Theophilus Blinsham Agga, 4 June 1686 Your Worships letter of the 29th last past I have received with the goods therein exprest, desiring your Worship to send me these following goods, vizt six chests of sheets, haveing monys for part of them; one baile of green perpetuanoes; ten half firkins of tallow; one cask of knives; one cask of rum, on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Have per bearer sent your Worship my monthly account with the ballance, desireing your Worship to send a receipt for the monys sent before and this now.lam heartyly sorry that your Worship shou ld think that I should detain any of the Com pan yes mony in my hands or imploy any of it to my use; to the contrary , the bearer can wittness that I have never done, but sent your Worship all the mony thatI received in the month. I would with all my heart [have] sent an account before but sickness hath hindred me. I have put in the goods in my acount that was laid buy for com bought in March. 617. Theophilus Blinsham Agga, 25 June 1686 I haveing the cooveniency per Doctor Griffin, desire your Worship to send me two or three hundred iron ba1Ts and one bail of green perpetuanoes, if any blew to spare one bail, and some narrow nicconees , and some paper brawles, of the 2 latter what your Worship trunks fitt. Just now I received your Worships letter, for which I shall gladly wait on your Worship with my monthly account. 618. [Theophilus Blinsham]4 Agga , 16 July 1686 This is to desire your Worship there may be sent tomorrow if possible 3 bailes blew perpetuanoes, 3 ditto green, a cask of 1 lb basons, the Arcanyes being here with a considerable quantitty of gold, desires these goods tomorrow , I haveing sold what blew perpetuanoes I had with as many green. I have paid the Braffos custom, and find that your Worship is misinformed of a pallaver between me and the Braffo , and as I find are very well sattisfied. I have likewise recei ved from Mr James Nightingale two of the Companyes slaves, Ahenisaw and wife. I have desired Mr Nightingale to view the com of Francis Nixson but as yet not done. If your Worship pleases one cask of knives, those I have are very much rusty, almost eaten up. 619. Theophilus Blinsham Agga , 19 July 1686 1have sent your Worship per bearer Bryan Ingle on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England twelve marks of good gold in part of this month account for which I desire a receipt for the same. I desire your Worship to send tomorrow , if possible, on the account of the Royall Affrican Company , two bales of blew perpetuanoes, and two ditto green, and a cask of l lb basons, and a cask of knives , and some cases of spirrits. If your Worship pleases to take I l a for the stript sattins. Bryan Ingall hath promisd amendment and if your Worship pleases will try him a 1ittle longer. Agga , 4 Aug. 1686620. Theophilus Blinsham This morning I was comeing to wait on your Worship with my monthly account, also with the ballance of the same, but I was unfortunately hindred per the sea. I being got not above seaven or eight rods from the shore, was oursett [= overset] and in saveing myselfe lost the Royall Company gold, which is eight markes upwards. I have all this day endeaverd with a great many blacks to find it by their diveing and dragrakes, the water being not above one fathom and ha1fe at low water, desireing your Worship if any thing that will be servisable or any black or other, to send with what speed may be, being in great hopes with good assistance to find it. I here inclosed sent this months account , wishing I had been so fortunate to send the gold with it.5 621. Jonas Perring Agga, l OAug. 1686 According to your Worships and Councells order have inventoryd the warehouse at Agga with Mr Walker and Mr Griffin, which inventory you will receive by the bearer. We found the key of the warehouse in Mr Blinshams chest, but ca not find a cracra ofmony without there be any in the trunk , which we have not the key of, but Bryan Jngall sayeth that he doth beleive that there is [not?] a cracra ofmony of the Company in the factory. We have made what inquiry we can about the mony, and have likewise examined one of the canomen that carried Mr Blinsham of when the mony was lost and he saith that the cano was not oversett but that when they put of Mr Blinsham sat in the cano with the mony in his lap, but how it came into the water they canot tell. The said canoman has promised us ffaithfully he will come up to Cabo Corso , to declare the truth of the matter. He likewise informed us that when they put off Mr Blinsham fell backward in the cano. Likewise yesterday we found out the man that took up the mony , and demanding of him how he came to find it, he made us answer that the mony being lost he came to Mr Blinsham and told him ifhe would give him a dram of the bottle he would goe and fetch his mony for him, but we tax'd him with being bribed by the said Blincham for the concealing thereof, which when he heard, had not the face to deney it, but rose up and went out of the ffactory. We can per no means perswade him to Cabo Corso. The slaves [sic] we have likewise examined , who sayes he knows nothing ofill [?= itt], but shall send him up in this cano.6 All the Company affaires stand verry well at present but as yet have no trade. 622. Jonas Perrin Agga, l OAug. 1686 This accompanys one of the canomen that carried Mr Blinsham of when the mony was lost, which hope your Worship will be pleased to examine, and he will tell you the whole truth of the business. 623. Jonas Perrin (Agga] , 10 Aug. 1686 Your letter I received yesterday with two bales containing forty sayes and one bale containing ffi.fty carpitts, which hope to have a good trade for them. All the Companys affaires stand very well at present. I beg a supply of paper quills and wax. The people here demand a piece of nicconee and a case of spirrits to bring down a trade, which I want your order for. 624. Jonas Perrin Agga, 4 Sept. 1686 These serves for covert for August account , bein[g ] made up the day Mr Nightingale took charge of this ffactory, the ballance hereof being 2mk 7a 6ta of gold. Our Ardra slaves make s sad complaint for their mony and say that Mr Blinsham did not pay them. I therefore humbly desire to know whether I must pay them. All the Company affairs stand very well at present. 625. Jonas Perring Agga, l O Oct. 1686 This 10th day of October have received yours and understand what you wrote concerning my takeing care of the Company's concern's, which I shall doe to the best ofmy endeavour, and give a ffaire [accompt] atttbe end of every month. As to the Cabusheres at Agga have been verry hard, but at present are pretty civill. Humbly begg [pardon] for my being so sborte, bein[g] very ill could hardly hold up my hand to write this. 626. Robert Elwes Agga, I6 Dec. 1686 Yesterday according to your orders with Mr Rice Wight, Mr Ralph Hassell and Mr William Halford 7 took a true inventory of the Royall Affrican Companys merchandize belonging to Agga, mentioning each sorts how qualified, which done gave Mr Hassel I a receipt for the same. As traders come down shall acquaint your Worship ffurtber. In the intrim I desire I may have two casks of two pound basons, one case of good sayes, twelve stript sattins, one case course sletias, ten boysadoes, some paper of both sizes, and iffyour Worship can spare 8 or 9 chests of sheets. 627. Robert Elwes Agga, 18 Dec. [1686] This morning came the Arcanyes belonging to Annamaboe to demand their custome of a new ffactor settleing here, telling me that they alwaies had allowd them a green perpetuano and halfe a case of spirrits, but were denyd till order from your Worship. The Agga Cabusheers also were with me to demand there custom , which are two green perpetuanoes and an anchor of rum, which has been given by Mr Blinsham fforrnerly , so desire to know your Worships approbation. I am in great want of paper, or otherwise would not have writ in this manner. I could have sold some iron barrs, but they not being marked they would not have them, soe desire you would be pleased to send me a marking iron and we will doe as well as we can. 628. Robert Elwes Agga, 19 Dec. 1686 16thYours of the instant received with four chests of sheetts, ten boysadoes , twenty sayes, twelve narrow stript sattins, twenty course sletias, and three peices brown Hessens on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Two of the Hessens are I suppossed designed for Mr Hassell. I can give your Worship no news of thisplace as yett. Wee expect the Captain of the Arcanies here a Munday. [PS] I return your Worship thanks for your kind invitation and will wait upon you. 629. Robert Elwes Agga, 28 Dec. 1686 This morning were the Cabusheers w ith me to demand their custom and dashes at Christmas , so desire to lmow what you will be pleased to allow them. I desire your Worship would be pleased to send down two hundred iron barrs, one hundred two pound and one hundred three pound pewter basons, one cask of rum, which are at present the needful]. 630. Robert Elwes Agga, 31 Dec. I 686 Yours of the 30th instant received with two hundred iron barrs and a cask of rum, mentioning to contain eighty nine gallons, the pew ter except [sic] , with one hundred narrow nicconees, they being all gon to seaven, I desire may receive them as soon as possib le. As to the Braffo and Curranters customs, they were here to demand them this morning, being two sayes, two cases spirritts and two iron barrs, which shall be deliverd them. As to the Cabusbeers I shall endeavour to abreviate their demands, though doe beleive their allowances as by report have been much enlarged by my predecessors, but hope with the indifferency your Worship hath to remayn the factory to bring them to an easy perswsion, for find by your last they are much danted. Have sent by Captain Petter two marks, six ounces. ten angles of gold, on account of the Royall Affrican Company. Whatt more attends shall [send] with my accounts. 631. Robert Elwes Agga Factory , 5 Jan. 1686/7 Yours of the 3dinstant with two hundred two pound basons and one hundred three pound ditto and one hundred and twenty narrow nicconees received, all on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Per Captain Peter have sent up my December account and one ounce, el.eaven angles and six taccoes, which with the six marks, five ounces, ten angles and eight taccoes as per account appears. Have had the Cabushers of this place with me severall times, and cannot bring them lower than four ginghams and one Welch playne, it being as they say verry ordinary to what they fformerly have received. Shall observe your Worships orders in buying three hundred chests com. 632. Robert Elwes Agga, 5 Jan. 1686/7 This comes by Yabboys boy, who hearing of Captain Buttrams return desires your Worship would give hin1 some sattisfaction about his former pa llaver as per sending Robin down , that was aboard Captain Buttram but lived here with Jonas [Perrin]. He has been with me severall times and sayes that his mony lent Jonas was deliverd Mr Humfryes by Jonas , and as he told him to buy blew perpetuanoes, on which account Yaboy lent it hi.Jn,. I desire may have your order for the deleviry of the goods the Cabusheers demand for their Christmas dashes. 633. Robert Elwes Agga , 11 Jan. 1686/7 Yours of the 7'hinstant received, and yesterday the Cabushers when they came from Fanten were with me to demand their customary dashes at Christmas, so told them your Worship would allow of none, it being so lately that they had received dashes from others that lived here before me. Their answer was that unless they should be paid as formerly they have been, they will not goe out of the factory but remain where they are, and doe impute it to my fault, that they have not alrea dy received it. I desire your Worship would be so kind as to allow it in my time as before, and as you writ they have received sufficient dashes already, they say what was given them before my time was not on account of Christmas , and as itt being customary are resolved they will not loose it, and their demands being so great cannot on my own account allow it, soe desire will consider the dayly troble they put me to . Without they are paid must expect more. They are all now in the factory and put me to great inconveniency, which may be remided if your Worship pleases to grant an order that they may have their demands, which were four ginghams and a Welch playne. 634. Robert Elwes Agga , 12 Jan. 1686/7 Yours of the 11th instant received. As yett have not bought any com by reason that the Cabushers have been this ten dayes up at Fanteen, but today the Cabushers returning have promised me that when they are paid their custome at Christmas, that in ten dayes they will procure me three hundred chests com and that they have by them great quantities, so expect an answer to my letter sent yesterday. Com is here very plenty and hope in a short time to be suppl yd. Yaboy has promised me to bring in one hundred chests himselfe and [with] what others doe prom is you may depend upon the quantity you write for. As it comes in shall have immediate advice. 635. Robert Elwes Agga, 15 Jan. 1686/7 This morning have taken in fifty chests of com , which is all we have at present bought , but shall be atak.en in every day o question not but in 4 or 5 daye s to be supplyed with three hundred chests, which is the complement you ordered to be bought. Desire may be furnished with one hundred lead barrs , ten boysadoes , twelve narrow sattins, six barrels powder, if you can all halve owns [= ones], and looking glasses, all on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Here is a grate noyse of warr so that little trade is here stirring. 8 The Cabushers are all up at Fanteen but have left order for the delivery of com, so that this weak at farthest I hope to have my whole complement. 636. Robert Elwes Agga, 19 Jan. 1686 [= 1687] Yours of the I 8th instant [received] with twelve pieces ofboysadoes , one hundred lead barrs, twelve pieces of narrow stript sattins, sixty looking glasses no.3, sixty no.4, sixty no.5 (so 1 found the case to contain, by your lette r no.4 is but sixty mentioned, the mark of the case is 66), four whole ban-ells and four halfe ditto [powder], on account of the Royall Affrican Company [of] England. When have received the three hundred chests of com shall give advice. I desire your Worship would spare me the 5 hand cano I sent up to remayn with me here, being not any upon any occasion to be gott. 637. Robert Elwes Agga , 27 Jan. 1686/7 Yours of the 26th instant received , which[ = this] is to advise you that I have not taken in any more com than one handred [sic] and thirty chests. Corn is very plenty, but here not being people to bring it canot in a small time expect to procure any quantity without the warrs sease and their people to return , of which there is no likelyhood, the Anguinas being resolved to break a free passage of trade and come on the intent nearer and nearer upon the Fanteen. 9 As yet they have bad no settle [= set] battle. What corn we buy is most for lead barrs, and doe take in aboute 8 or l O chests a day. At that rartes [= rates] we may be procurd corn, so that the utmost may be expected to take in by me canot be more than three hundred chests in any small time. Yesterday went away the East India Merchant. Not any trade stirring . 638. Robert Elwes Agga, 29 Jan. 1686/7 Yours of the 26th instant received , and shall endeavour to gett what com possible can be procu red [ and] observe your order in not bartering any more lead barrs for com, and to sell narrow nicconnees at 3a and iron barrs at 24 per bendy, [and] flowered silk longees to be disposed at Sa. Severall of these received last were very much damnified. Since my last have not rece ived more than twelve chests com. As it comes in sha ll not be backward in advising. Last night came down a small English interloper and lyes between Annamaboe and Agga , and his cheife of of his loading is sugar and rum, some allejars and broad nicconees. He tanys here to take in fourty chests of com and on that intent he sent yesterday for Yabboy aboard, who I beleive will endeavour to supply him. As to the warrs they have made no proceedings but lyes in readiness, expecting the enimys approachment . 639. Robert Elwes Agga, 3 Feb. 1686/7 This comes by Mr Griffith, with whome have sent my January account and four mark, four taccoes for ballance. Desire may have the four pound basons , and if your Worship can spare me any halffirkins of tallow could immediately dispose of them, as allso sheets, which are the comodities enquired for. Informed you in my last what quantity of com bad by me and taken, since have in no more than six chests, so that in all that I have is one hundred and sixty chests of corn. But little discourse concerning the warrs, the Cabusheers remayne al up at Faoteen and have sent word down that in case they fight not in 5 dayes, that then they must tarry a mouth longer for a bondee. 10 Severall of my sattins received last month were damnified, mentioned them in per my last [by] mistake [as] :flowered silk. 640. Robe1t Elwes Agga, 5 Feb. 1686/7 These comes on purpose to desire your Worship that I may have sent me down two hundred iron barrs with the goods I write for by Mr Griffin. Have taken in but little com since my last. 641. Robert Elwes Agga, 7 Feb. 1686/7 Yours of 5th and ?1h have received with one hundred and fifty iron barrs, three hundred and nynty sheets and ten whole firkins of tallow on account of the Royall Affrican Company ofEngland . The blew perpetuanoes except[= expect] per next. As traders comes in shall give your Worship advise [and] observe your order in disposing of the above goods for gold and not to barter any of them for com , which at present is not to be procured at any parts. But little news of the warrs . 642. Robert Elwes Agga, 11 Feb. 1686/7 These comes by Mr Griffin by who me I desire your Worship would be pleased to send down two hundred iron barrs, ten screwd pewter juggs, a case of blew perpetuanoes on account of the Royall Affrican Company of Englan d. Upon opening one of the chest of sheets we found them all damnified to about six, which Mr Griffin will also affirme. The Captain of the Arcanies is some time since come down and has been with me severall times to know what should be aJlowd him as monthly sallery , so desire to know of your Worship what you will be pleased to allow him. He is a man formerly brought good trade , and I hope will doe so againe, so desire he may be incouraged. Likewise desire may have more tallow down. Have bought no more com than what formerly informd, nither is there any probabillity of procureing more. 643. Robert Elwes Agga Factory , 12 [Feb.] 1686/7 Yours of the 12 instant I have received with one hundred and fifty iron barrs. The Dutch I am well advised sells their iron at 26 per bendy, and at that rate they will not sell any as Jong as we are provided , ours being in more esteem. Have sent up per the 11 hand cano the remayns of the chests of sheets, which were received damnified. Have disposed of.fifteen, so that in the chest there are fifty. Desire your Worship would be pleased to spare me some more sheets. 644. Robert Elwes Agga, Feb. 15 1686/7 Yours of this dayes instant have received with two bailes containing fifty perpetunanoes blew, no.797 and 787, also two hundred and sixty sheets in four chests on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Shall advise your Worship when have taken in the three hundred chests of corn. Tt comes in very slowly, haveing in all one hundred and seventy chests. 645. William MacDowall Agga, 20 Feb. 1686/7 According to your Worships order l anivd here yesterday about nine of the clock , when I found Mr Elwes (though bad) yett better than I expected. He was taken evill [= ill] of a feaver and ague with a violent vomitting ever since Wednesday last. This morning I gott him an emetick, which hath wrought very well, and now, though the time of his ague be two bowers past, there are no simthoms [= symptoms]. I canot leave him till tomorrow, so on Tewsday morning I shall wait on your Worship and I hope give an account of his recovery. 646. Robert Elwes Agga, 6 March 1686/7 These are to desire your Worship to send down one case of sayes, one ditto of course sletias and ten boysadoes. Have sent by the bearer my February accounts with the remayns of the ballance , being mkO 2oz 4a 8ta of gold. Have bought seaven men, one woman slaves, which I have sent to Annamaboe. 647. Robert Elwes Agga, 8 March 1686/7 Yours of the 7th instant have received, with twenty sayes, fourty course sletias, and ten boysadoes of the Royal Affrican Company of England. Yesterday we have sbipt on board the Lucitania , one hundred chests [sc. of com]; this day or tomorrow hope she may dispatchd . Have advisd Mr Hassell to send up what slaves he bas buy him; have sent him twelve lusty men slaves, and one woman. Here is no more com to be procured without your Worship will allow two angles per chest, they haveing by reason of their warrs lost great part of their rowsaing time, and are also resolved to war with the Fettues, 11 so that they will keep their com for fear of want, without they can dispose of it as is rated above. 648. Robert Elwes Agga, 10 March 1686/7 Yours of this dayes instant have received, and inclosed have sent Captain Bristows 12 receipts for one hundred eighty two chests of good corn, so that have no more remayning than fifty eight chests, and doe not expect to procure any more, without your Worship will be pleased to allow of two angles per chest. Have bought three lusty men since the last that were sent up. The Dutch buys great quantity and send them to the Mine. If you have any broad tapseiles or blew Welch plains, desire I may have some sent me. Captain Bristow saild yesterday morning. 649. Robert Elwes Agga, 12 March [16]86/7 Yours of this dayes date have received with a bail containing eighty broad tapseles, twenty Welch plains, viz ten blew ten green, twenty anchors rum and ten whole firkins tallow, observe your orders in disposeing of them. As to corn I doe endeavour to gett in what I can, but they are really resould [= resolved] not to sell any under two angles per chest; I told them what your Worship write, that unless they would assist us with com we could not buy any more slaves, they answer that in case we did not the Dutch would and that they could send their com down to Accra and gett three angles per chest. Desire you would be pleased to spare me a little wax or wafer. 650. John Boylston Cabo Corso Castle, I mean Agga [sic], 22 March [1687] I have demanded of Captain Draper goods for the two slaves that he has not paid for, he tells me possitively that he will pa,t with nothing, ifl will take two I may, but I cannott doe it for he will give one that is a fool, and the other not able to stand, and them I can by no means receive. I can bring bim to no termes in the world, therefore request your speedy answer, for I tarry on purpose for itt. Tis in vain to talk to him, for he will do nothing in reason. I offerd him to take the two men that is in dispute, but them he will not part withall, but ifl will have any I must take the refuge [= refuse] ones. He sayes he will sayle tonight, therefore request, your answer, as soon as may bee. He will go away 90 chests of corn short or thereabout 's. Mr Elwes is very ill. I lay at Agga last night but could have no rest, by reason of his indisposition. God send him well for he look like death. I beleive when all is done I must protest against the Captain, for he will come to no compliance. The Company letters and your Worship[s] are all aboard. I have given Champion his noatt and have sent up the other. 651. Robert Elwes Agga, 26 March [16]86 [sic; = 1687] Yours of the 16 instant have received, with two men slaves, am sorry they are not according to expectation. Observe your orders in buying two hundred chests of corn. Have shipt on board Captain Draper eighty eight chests com, and are very good, as per bis receipts inclosed does apear. He desires this night to sayle, haveing bought a five hand cano and hired five men to goe down with him. But little trade stirring, the Arcanies being at warrs with the Anguinas. 13 652. Robe1t Elwes Agga, 2 Aprill 1687 By Mr Halford have sent up my March acount with the ballance, three marks two ounces seaven angles and six taccoes. As yett have taken in no corn since your order. Desire your excuse for my shortness and ill writeing, being much indispos' d with the dry bellyacke. I am extreame want for a stock lock for the warehouse and a padlock or two. 653. Robert Elwes Agga, 8 April [ 1687) Yours by the 7 hand cano have received , with my March account which you send me back to rectifie, in which I find no fault. As to what I charge a head for the Negros, is no more than what your order was to give, and if you please to vallue the Negroes you will find the goods come out proportionable at the rate of7 peaz per man and 6 per woman; how you rate goods at Cabo Corso I know not. As we sell our sayes for gold, they will have them at the same for slaves, as sayes at 14a, boysadoes 1oz, paper brawles la 6 ta. I know not what you mean in hudling 14 my account up, it is in the same method I alwaieses [sic] write them and as I was first ordered to do. I have sent it up in hopes you will be sattisfied therewith. Desire you would be pleased to send me down some sheets, the woman slave you'J find in my account charged as sent to Annamaboe, and Mr Hassell keeps her, being in want of a canky woman; I suppose he has giveing creditt for her. 654. Robert Elwes Agga , 11 April 1687 This comes on purpose, not seeing any canoe coming downe, to desire you to send downe with the sheets, two bailes ofblew perpettuanoes, lWenty sayes on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. But little come, and noe slaves to be procured . 655. Robert Elwes Agga , 12 April 1687 Yours of this dayes instance have received with fifty blew perpettuanoes. Observe your orders in not bartering sayes for slaves under one ounce. At present have noe other occasion for any other goods then what advised you. 656. Robert Elwes Agga, 7 May 1687 This comes with my accompts and ballance, with what delivered Mr Humfryes alredy, which in all is five markes six ounces six angles and tenn taccoes. l had sent my account before, butt have been much indisposed with my old paine. Here is butt little trade stering for gold, come or slaves. Laste night came downe A11en from the Braffoe, and is fully resolved to vissitt the Fetturees, being much encouraged by the Fanteens, who had before his com ing downe here designed the like. 15 657. Robert Elwes Agga, 9 May 1687 This comes on purpose to begg the favor of your worshipe and Gentellmen oftbe Councell to addmitt ofmy goeiog downe to Accraa along with Mr John Boylston, who I understand is goeing downe there; 16 and now that trade being dead here, know not when I may have the same opertunity, soe the grant will be a great obligation. 658. John Boylston Agga , 20 May 1687 I am just now arrived here, and in good health , and Mr Whiting with mee. I doe not find any body has been here to inventory either of the ffactoryes , soe am here will doe it my selfe , and when have doun will retume, God willing , with Mr Whiting. The inventory of Accraa ffactory , sent one by the sloope and the othe r will bring up with mee , being soe cold and wett in meeting with this great tumadoe that could not write my selfe, soe begg your worship will be pleased in answer to th is, you will order Mr Whiting to inspect into Anamabo ffactory with mee, two heads being better then one. 659. Robert Elwes Agga , 21 May 1687 This comes by Mr John Boylstone, who with my selfe have taken a true and exact inventory of all the Royall Affrican Companies merchandizes and matterialls belonging to the ffactory of Agga. Do desire by the first opportunity you would be pleased to send downe some tallow, sheets, blew perpettuanoes and good sayes, which are the only goods are likely to sell here , tread [ = trade] being butt verry dull. Wee heare that Captain Gould is arived, soe hope I may be provided with the above goods. I rettume your worship thankes for the liberty you was pleased to grant mee in going down to Accraa. 660. Robert Elwes Agga, 26 May 1687 Hereby you will receive a narrow stript sattin which Mr Boylston upon inventor.ing the Factory excepted against , it is as I received him, and by the end you may see it has nott been cutt. Had I the goods I formerly writt for could have disposed of a great quantity. Desire you would be pleased to add to them tenn barrells powder, one hundred lead barrs. Butt little news, only that Aben Comenda had liked to have been poison'd by the Captain Co1mantine Twone [= Towne], who was ffeede 17 as they say by the King of Fettue. 18 661. Robert Elwes Agga , 29 May 1687 Yours by the 7 hand canoe with 8 barrels of powder have received. Am very glad to hear of the arrivalJ of Captain Thompson , and hope by him we may be supp lied with what goods we want. 662. Robe1t Elwes Agga, 29 May 1687 Yours of the 23th instant by the nine hand canoe have received , with five chests of sheetes , twenty half firkins of tallow and fifty lead barrs on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England . Hope from Captain Thompson wee may be supplyed with sayes and blew perpetuanoes. Shall observe your orders and make a distinct account of the goods received from you, and inclosed have sent three receipts for them. 663. Robert Elwes Agga , 9 June 1687 This comes by the nine hand canoe, from whom have received twenty five blew perpetuanoes, ten whole and thirty half ffirkins tallow, on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Since my arrivall here have understood that the .Braffo and Quarranteers have debarred any traders from coming hither, on account that they are not paid their monthly customes for ground rent, likewise for putting small com into the ground, which by information of Mr Hassell has never been allowed here but solely from Anamaboe. I desire your speedy answer in this case, that trade may not be fondred. [PS] .But Little trade stirring. 664. Robert Elwes Agga, 13 June 1687 Yours of the 11th instant have received, and by reason of the badness of the weather could not answer it till now. Traders are still forbidden the ffactory , and that I can understand is only that as Anamaboe did formerly pay two cases of spiritts, being as well for Agga as there, as. MrHassell since his time has not paid but one for their putting their small com into the ground. Then likewise I understand that the Braffo and Quarenteers are resolved that Anamaboe shall pay 1 oz 8a per month and Agga 12a per month, which pallavera as yett they have not made with me, but as the Cappusheers here informe me. I tarry expecting an answer from the Braffo and Quarenteers, which is hindred by reason the excessive rains that has fallen there , so that all our trade here is hindred. Two dayes agoe Ahen, Domine 19 and the Chief Cabbusheers of Anamaboe went up to Hebraw country20 with the intention to get! their assistance in pursuitt to their designe of fighting the Ffetues. My sheetes are all disposed to about 33, tallow one half of the small, more might have been had not this happened . When an answer comes from the Braffo you shall have immediate advice, [PS] Mr Griffen has been some time iII. 665. Robert Elwes Agga, 17 June 1687 Yours of the 16th instant by Assina have received, and as to enlarging the ground rent have no more advice than what I formerly wrote you. Traders are no longer bindred. We are in dayly expectacon of the Quarenteers people down, on what account know not unlesse it be to receive their custom es for putting small corn into the ground. You writt me that Mr Nightingale did not allow more than a few old knives, which I believe by his account does not appear so. They tell me here it was allwayes paid at Anamaboe, and Mr Hassell not as wel I paying of it in his time I believe has been the meanes of this pallavera. It is only a case of rumme, and if they demand it again there must be no contend ing, so hope it will be allowed. By Assina you will [receive] six markes, five ounces, and twelve angles of good gold, being for goods sold on account of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Desire I may have some more sheetes and half ffirkins of tallow, they being the most part of the produce of the said gold above menconed. But little trnde for anything else. [PS] Mr Griffen is something amended. 666. Robert Elwes Agga, 19 June 1687 Yesterday anived here three Dutch interlopers , who inform me of an English interloper lying to windward and designes to remain there two months, on what accompt I know not. Likewise came down the Curranteers people yesterday night and demanded for the future six piez per month ground rent, which I told them would not be allowed, so they desire your answer or they will stop trade, which with much perswasions to the contrary, or they would have done it already. I desire you would make a quick answer, in expectacon of which they now remain. I desire you would send the goods I wrote for, having in my hands two bendyes for sheetes, and more mony will come provided I have those goods desired . As to the case of spiritts must be forced to pay them for their small corn custome, pray give your real resolucon in this accompt, that trade may be no wayes hindered, for they are resolved to have so much of both ffactoryes or that wee deliver it21 to them again. 667. Robert Elwes Agga, 21 June 1687 Yours of the 20th instant have received , and according to your order sent for Mr Hassell, with whom this morning have discourst the Braffo and Quarenteers people that you are unwilling to give more for ground rent than what former ly were allowed them by your predecessors, so after a great insisting they demand two sayes, two anchors of brandy for both ffactoryes and that then they will give under their hands that no pallavera or hindrance of trade shall be any more pennitted by them, which un lesse you allow that then they will have six pieze per month for each ffactory, or that wee de] iver the ffactoryes to them, so have desired them to tarry til tomorrow, whicb tbey say shall be their extent, and in case of no answer that they will return and that trade shall be no longer admitted. Do also desire to lrnow whether Mr Nightingale did ever give any thing to a Cappusheer that buyes cowes for the Ffanteens, demanding of me one course sletiae, one gallon of rum, and thatMrNightingale did allways allow them once a year for both ffacto ryes. Desire I may be acquainted about it, that I may not raise new customes. If you please to send the goods I formerly wrote for with some more blew perpetuanoes, I could dispose of them. 668. Robert Elwes & Ra lph Hasse ll Agga, 22 June 1687 Yours of this days instant have received, and with Mr Hassell wee have made up the pa!lavera as cheap as possible could be , coppy of which have sent you. As for their monthly pay [it is] to be continued for both factorys as before. Shall not enlarge by reason have sent you the coppy of our agreements, and hope it will be for the Companys interest and yow-satisfaction. So I know not of any danger that may accrew but that you may with safety send down the goods I writt for , the sooner the better. PS. I pray also when the canoe comes to send me fifty balfffirkins of tallow. 669. Robert Elwes Agga, 25 June 1687 Yours of the 24 instant by the nine band canoe have received, with three hundred and ninety sheetes, sixty half ffirkins tallow, twenty four blew perpetuano es and one green ditto on acco mpt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Have according to your order sent up what corn the canoe would conveniently carry, quantity I know not , the Negroes having broke open the com roome and stole with com my chest [so] that I could not measure it, so must take it my your chest there. Have made a pal!ave ra wit h the Cappusheers about it, and till new com comes can not be satisyed. Do imagine may hav e lost fifteen chests of com, as I allso told them. They prom ise me they wi ll return me the damage . Am sorry it fell out in so unfortunate a time. It 's not the first abuse wee have received from them, and to make complaint to tl1e Braffo and Quarenteers is only an expence extraordinary, for the Anamaboe people do as they please and no contradiction to be given. Have received my self a sufficient damage from them , about tenn dayes agoe they came and destroyed my hoggs , some they shott dead and some they ca1Tied away with them, and plundered all the Agga people , not leaving them so much as a matt to ly on. 670. Robert Elwes Agga, 26 June 1687 This comes on purpose to desire you to send downe two hundred iron barrs that are marked , one case of course sletias, and six barrells of powder on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. Wee understand that the Arcanyes have made peace with the Akirns,22 so hope in a little time trade may encrease. Our factory is in a very bad condicon and wants repair very much. If you could spare Mr Chambers and a few slaves for a month it would be very acceptable. 671. Robert Elwes Agga, 29 June I 687 Yours of the 28th instant have received, with one hundred and sixty iron barrs, twenty course sletias, six whole barrells of powder on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. According to order have putt on board the canoe what com was remain ing in the factory, being in all eleven chests. Here is not any more to be procured here as yett. 672. Robert Elwes Agga, 4 July 1687 These are to desire you to send down two hundred iron barrs more, having last month and with this disposed of most part. I would have sent up my accompts with the bearer, but understanding Mr Hassell designes to be with you tomo1Tow or next day, by whom you will receive them with the balance. If you can spare me four chests of sheets it will be vety necessary. Mr Whiting has been detained here by reason of bad weather, endeavored once to get off but was forced to return, the canoe being full of water. 673. Robert Elwes Agga, 7 July 1687 This comes with my accompt and ballance, with the six marks five ounces twelve angles already sent up makes l0mk 01oz 00a 5 ta. I had sometime since sent my accompts up but expected Mr Hassell would have gone up, so finding to the contra1y I now send them, and begg your pardon for the delay. I desire you would send the iron I writt for, with the sheetes and with them tenn boysadoes. [PS] Capta in Thompson saild from hence yesterday. 674. Robert Elwes Agga , 8 July 1687 Yours of the ]1h instant have received, with two hundred iron barrs, four chests sheetes. Observe your order in selling iron at 20 or 22 per bendy, but believe the Negroes will not be brought to it. I could have sold most of them this day at 24 per bendy, but informing them your orders they told me they would rather buy the Dutch barrs, who sells at 28 per bendy. The Braffo and Quarenteers have been with me to receive their customes at danceing, which is two cases of rume, which has been given them. The Cappusheers also demand as much, but as yett have not received it till such time I have your order. 675. Robert Elwes Agga , 13 July 1687 Since your last orders for disposing iron barrs at 20 or 22 per bendy have sold none, and likewise but little trade, so desire to knoe whether you please to continue it further or no, here being mony but are unwilling to part with it unlesse you are pleased to sell iron at 24 per bendy, likewise do believe that I shall not sell them for more. I received from on board the Allegator sloop ten boysadoes on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company of England. [PS]Have bought 1000 yamms for Captain Gould. 676. Robert Elwes Agga, 20 July 1687 Yours of the 19th instant by Mr Griffith have received, and am very sorry I cannot answer the contents, not having by me above of a chest and that old come, and as yett here is no new com. Neither do I believe when ripe , there will be any sold , reserving all as provisions for their intended warrs with the Ffetues , which may be, but not suddenly. As to any canoemens being abused, or anybody else belonging to Cabo Corso, it is their own faults, for did they not go to Anamaboe , they might remain here quiett , without any molestacon, but there they are and will be abused by the Bendefoes. [PS] But little trade . 677. William Cross Agga, 21 Aug. 1687 I arrived safe to Anamaboe , and went the next morning to Agga , according as you was pleased to order, and was received civily by the people of both places , who wait Mr Wights comeing downe, for the resetling of Aunamaboe againe. 23 I have no more to add at present , being yett a stranger , but in my next shall advise further. 678. William Cross Agga, 27 Aug. 1687 The in closed are a coppy of my Comenda accompts 24 and an inventory of all the Royall Company merchandizes in this place taken by Mr Walker and my self. Wee find most of the goods to be very much damnified, which wee have vallued according to the best of our judgements. Here is ve1y litle to do at present, but understanding from the Cabusheers in a short time, as soon as their pallav era is ended, there will be a good trade, in order to which they tell me that the Generali of the Mina is sencting up a white man into the country with dasheys, and if you please to do the same the buisiness will be more easily and sooner composed, which is expected because the benefitt of the trade will be as much ours as theirs, and wee have the credditt with them. As trade presents I shall send for such goods as I shall see wanting, here being now occasion only for some rumme, a case of course sletias, and broad tapseils if any, which be pleased to send with my chests &ca. This invoyce is for your satisfaction of the Royall Company concerns. When Mr Wight comes all things are ready to be overhalled againe. 679. William Cross Agga, 4 Sept. 1687 The occasion of my writing is the sending of the in closed, and to acquaint you tbe Cabushers are very hard upon mee for their custom, being two perpettuanoes, one anckor of brandy, and a cloath to the Captain of the towne, which I hope you will be pleased to allow in soe expensive a place. Here is wanting the 5 hand canoe belonging to this Factory, and desire you will send in her one hogshead of rum for Captain Yabba, and the loest price, and as he likes that, he will buy half a dozen more as he tells mee. 680. William Cross Agga, 9 Sept. 1687 Yours of the i" and 8th instant I have received , the first by land the other by Mr Nightingale, with a caske of rum. Edward Jacklin is here, and Griffin will be up in a day or two. He has sent his chest and things by the canoe, and only stayes while I tell over the things againe. Here will be trade shortly if wee have goods come to supply them. I find Yabboy thought to have been trusted, butt since you have precautioned settles me more :firme in the resolution of trusting none of them. I have not more to add at present, only I have occation for tenn barrells of powder, in whols and halves, and some halfe ffirkins of tallow if any. 681. William Cross Agga, 11 Sept. 1687 This accompanies James Griffith, who stayed a little the longer to compose his affaires here, and are to desire you to send the goods I wrot for, with tenn cases of spiritts, by the first conveyance. Wee are in hopes of a trade as soon as goods that are wanting can be had. 682. William Cross Agga, 13 Sept. 1687 Yours of the 12th instant by the 9 hand canoe I have received , with ten whole barrels of powder, and ten cases of spirits, all which I hope are come to a good markett. All things are well here. 683. William Cross Agga, 14 Oct. 1687 By the 11 hand canoe I have received eight chests containing five hundred and twenty sheets, and one case containing twenty says, forty halfe ffirkins of tallow and ninty Guynea stuffs, for which shall give the Royall Affrican Company credditt accordingly . All things are well here. 684. William Cross Agga, 17 Oct. 1687 These are to acquaint you that the bearer, one of the best working slaves the Royall Company has here, being disabled at present by a cut in his ffingers, the other two cant putt the come roome and ffactory in that nessessaty repaire which is wanting without more help, soe desire you would be pleased to order what you shall thinke convenient to the Cabusbiers and they will assist mee in both. There is some come lyes ready for me in the towne, which sh.all gett in as soone as I can gett the roome fixt, but here is a very bad trade for money, occasioned by five or six Dutch or Dane interlopers that have been up and downe neare these three weeks togather. By the first conveyance be pleased to send a caske of lime. 685. William Cross Agga, 2 Nov. 1687 This accompanyes Edward Jackline , who brings my October accompt, and the ballance. Here has been butt little trade till within this four days, which makes my takins soe small. I have occasion for one hundred iron barrs, and a caske oflime to help to repaire the ffactory. The corne roome I have gott donn, and suppose shall quickly purchase the quantity of come you have ordered. The ffactory is verry much out ofrepaire , and with your leave shall agree with the Cabusheers , and gett itt don us cheape as possible . By this conveyance have alsoe sent a good weomen slave on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company. 686. William Cross Agga , 8 Nov . 1687 Yours by the 9 hand canoe with one hundred iron barrs I have received , and as for the repayres of the Factory, I shall do it with the least charge that possibly can be expected , which I have ever endeavoured , wheresoever I have been, though at present cannot compute the cost, but shall not suffer it to be extraordinary . Tis true here is but littfo trade now, but they tell me in two months wee shall have as good takings as has been knowne for a considerable time. Yesterday and this day I tooke in about one hundred chests, all very good come , and if you are pleased to order more than what you did before , I shall accordingly purchase it. Now is the time , for shortly they have new come and that will not be so fitt for your purpose . 687. William Cross Agga , 15 Nov. 1687 The occasion of my writeing is to desire you to send me eight chests of sheets , one hundred and fifty Guinea stuffs, and fifty iron barrs, I have taken in about two hundred chests of come, for darnnified goods, and if you have occasion for more, be pleased to advise. I am told it is not safe coming by land, so have send th.is by a two hand canoe. [PS] Pray be pleased to send a litle botle of ink. 688. William Cross Agga , 18 Nov. 1687 Yours by the 11 hand canoe have received , with two hundred and sixty sheets , one hundred and sixty Guinea stuffs, and one hundred iron barrs, all which I hope are come to a good market. In two or three days I shall have taken in a hundred chests of come more, as you have ordered, and desire you would be pleased to dispose of it with the ffirst conveniency, for tis very good, and in lying long may receive damage. 689. William Cross Agga, 2 Dec. 1687/8 [sic] This accompanyes Edward Jackline, by whom e I have sent my November accompts and the ballance , and desire you would be pleased to send me ten barrells of powder, in wholes and halfes , eight chests of sheets and two bailes of blew perpetuanoes, for I heare you have a suply by the Frances. Pray dispatch the bearer away , and order the goods by the first conveyance. 690. William Cross Agga , 4 Dec. 1687 Yours of yesterdays date by the 9 hand canoe I have received, togather with six chests containing 390 sheets, 25 blew and 25 green perpetuanoes, and six whole barrells of powder, all which I shall endeavor to dispose ofto the best advantage. Yesterday came downe one of the French ships , be sent bis boate ashoare with men twice to Annishan and will endeavor to settle there. Mr Nightingale took all the Bantefo es and mett them there, ofwbicb I suppose he will advise. 25 691. William Cross Agga, 14 Dec. 1687 By tbis conveyance have sent you one man and two weomen slaves, on accompt of the Royall African Company of England. On Saterday last I dispatched James Bayly in the Adventure sloope, with one hundred chests of come, according to your order. lnclosed is a coppy of their customary dashes here at Christmas, the originall of which they brought me, to demand it. I told them I would advise you first, and what you were pleased to order they should have, but here are noe ginghams. I bave occasion for another man if you can conveniently spare one, that is civil! and honest. 692. William Cross Agga, 21 Dec. 1687 Tbe occasion of my writing is to acquaint you that last night wee had the misfortune to have the warehouse broake open but lost only four fine sletias, which lay next at hand. They gott in under the tha[t]ch , made a hole through the sealing, and soe stole them out. 1sent this morning for the Cabushiers about it, and they promised to pay for the goods and secure the thieves if they can find them out. I thought it proper to advise imeadiately of this, that I may know your further pleasure . 693. William Cross Agga, 1 Jan. 1687/8 Yours by Captain Cowleys Mate I received, and shall take care to dispatch bim away with one hundred and thirty nine chest of come with all possible expeditjon as you have ordered. Yesterday came here the people to demand their masters custome, which is two says, two cases of spirritts, and two iron barrs, besides three carpetts to three of their men. This formerly was paid by the Cbeife of Annamoboe, but they being not paid there now, are come here for it. J advised with Mr Nightingale about this, and he says tiss their due, and must be paid, soe pray be pleased to send your order, for till then I sbaot be redd [= rid) of them. To the Cabushiers of this place their yeerely custome is as I wrote you before. As soon as I have made my accompts up shall advise what goods here will be occasion for. 694. William Cross Agga, 9 Jan. 1687/8 By the bearer I have sent my December accompts and Im 0o Oa 9ta, which with the 3m 2o 10a Sta I paid Mr Humfreyes when at Cabo Corsoe Castle last makes the ballance, being 4m 2o l la 2ta. I had sent sooner, but was hindered, by the Cabushiers palavering about their customes and dashes this Christmas. There is a green perpetuanoe and four gaJlons of rum to be paid to the Captain of the Arcanyes which I forgott to advise of before. I desire you would be pleased to send one hundred and fifty iron barrs , forty ha lfe firkins of tallow, two hundred Guynea stuffs, four chest of sheets, one hundred one pound pewter basons , and ten boysados , if any. I have gott the Factory new tbatcht and repai red at the cheapest rate I could. It had stood soe long that when they came upon it most of the stantions [= stanchions] and rafters broake in, which put me to more charges to gett new ones in their places. By this conveyance I have sent up a man and weoman slaves, the woman is brought to December accompt but the man is not. By this conveyance shall send another coppy, and desire you would be pleased to send the goods, that they may be here before night. 695. William Cross Agga, 11 Jan. 1687 /8 Yours of this date by the 11 hand canoe I have received, with one hundred iron barrs, two hundred and sixty sheets, 113 Guinea stuffs and 50 halfe firkins of tallow. The inclosed is John Garrards receipt for one man and two weomen slaves, which with the woman you received last, makes one man and three weoman slaves, being all that are brought to my December accompts, soe I thinke there is noe occasion of altering them againe, for the man slave returned have not brought to accompt, as I suppose you thought I had. I was indeed overseene in him, but for the future shall be more curious, if slaves present. 696. William Cross Agga, 28 Jan. 1687 /8 The inclosed coming this morning to my hands occasions my sending now, being desired to forward it with all expedition. 26 The Fanteens are preparing for the warr with Fetu, and tis said in a very short time will fight them. They keepe up the come to see the event of the warr , soe that their is very little to be purchased at present. What I have by me is about two hundred chests. 697. William Cross Agga, 4 Feb. 1687/8 This accompanys Nicolas Beadle, whome I have sent up with my January accompts and the ballance , and desire you would be pleased to send me on accompt of the Royall African Company of England six chest of sheets, ten barrells of powder , and two bales of blew and green perpetuanoes , and for come , fifty white blanketts , a case of course sletjas and what elce you can best spare. Here has been two angles per month always allowed to the Captain oftbe Prea, 27 which since my time I have not paid, because I bad not your order , The Cabushiers came the other day and made a greate pallaver about it. I told them there was no question but you would allow what had been formerly , of which be pleased to advise. By this conveyance have sent a good weoman slave. 698. William Cross Agga , 7 Feb. 1687/ 8 Yours of this date by the 11 hand canoe have received , with 40 course sletias , 50 white blanketts and 8 whole barrells of powder. Most of the windward trad e is coming this way , and had you sheets, says and perpetuanoes to supply us with our takings would be like those formerly at Comenda , for good Arcany gold. I hav e occasion for 200 iron barrs and a case of fine sletias, and about 40 gallons of nun, which be pleased to send by the first conveyance . These two angles per month to the Captain of the Prea was always charged by Mr Robert Elwes to the Company in his accompts , and not given by him . I am at four angles per month charge to servants in the Factory besides this, wh.icb if you are not pleased to allow Jmust pay it my selfe. Twas Captain Peaw that receiv ed it formerly , but he has been dead about this six months , and there is another in his place , which is to looke after all goods that come ashoare and come that goes off, to see that nothing be wanting or Jost. 699. William Cross Agga, 9 Feb. 1687/8 Yours of the gthinstant I have received with 150 iron bans, 20 fine sletias and 102 gallons of rum in two cask . Twas night before the goods came ashoare , soe had very trobl esome bringing them up in the dark. They lett one of the cask of rum fall of the slings and staved it. What the damage will be, I cannot tell yett . Wee are a drawing it into another cask . Here is a new 7 and 5 hand [canoe] to be sold , if you have occasion for any be pleased to advise , and what the prizes may be. I stayed to see the caske drawne of, and find the loss about twenty gallons . The cask I have sent up per the returne of this canoe. 700. [William Cross]28 Agga , 23 Feb . 1687/8 Yours of this date by the 11 band canoe have received , with fifty blew perpetuanoes , twenty five ditto greene , twenty pieces says, ten boysadoes , six greene, and six blew Welch plains, two of the greene damaged each, and one hundred iron barrs. I hear the King of Fanteen is dead, and that Captain Eggi11 is to succeed, 29 which I am told will put some stopp to our trade, as well for gold as come, till all things are resetled as formerly, 701. William Cross Agga, 3 March 1687 /8 By this conveyance, have sent you up by February accounts and the bal lance. The King ofFanteens death has put a stopp to all trade, or elce my takings bad been considerable. Captain Eggin I hear is witb the army , and will not sturr till be has resetled Aben in his old place at Fetoo. 30 Where[ = when] that pallavera is over, and the other established here there will be a good trade againe. These things happening thus has put me to great charges, for I was forced to pay to the army half a barrell of powder and eight gallons rum, and towards the Kings burial! a stript carpett, two sheets, and eight gallons of rum more, which they sayed had ever been allowed them upon tbe like occasions , and I find if I had denied them it I should have brought a worse trouble upon my self, among such people as these are. I have not brought any of this to accompt , but humbly advise, hoping you will be pleased to all owe the charge, or at least some part of it. I had in a chest of sheets forty six which were very much damnified , by salt water. I have disposed of twenty one, at ta6 per piece , and for tbe rest I can get nothing, so have sent up twentyfive ,judging they may serve for the Doctor, or some other use , for here they  will turn to no accompt at all. [PS] This chest of sheets I suppose received tbe damage in tbe shipp they came over in. 702. William Cross Agga, 28 March 1688 Yours of the 25th instant I have received , and these are to acquaint you that Mr Nightingale has dispatched Captain Sturt with his complement of come. What I have in the Factory is about two hundred and ten chests. Corne is very scarce now, occasioned by the warrs, and am afrayd will be dear, but I hope to purchase what you have ordered in a short time , having a promise from some of the Cabushiers, of which as it comes in shall timely advise. If you please to send downe a canoe with the next shipp , she will be tbe sooner dispatched, for here are none good . I paid towards the Kings funera l Itwo sheets, eight gallons of rum, and a carpett, which I hope you will be pleased to allqw, for I have been at great charge to the army besides this. [PS] Nicholas Bidle is very sick and weake. 703. William Cross Agga, 7 April 1688 This accompanyes Mr William Ronan, by whom I have sent my March accompts and the ballance, togather with the inventory of the Factory. I likewise went to Annishan, and there togather with Mr John Bloome and Mr William Ronan inventoryed that Factory, as you were pleased to order.31 Here is no trade, by reason of the warrs, but as soon as money presents, which I hear will not be long, shall advise of what goods there will be occasion for. By the first conveyance, will send up the woman slave, which is brought March accompt, there being none now. 704. William Cross Agga, J6 April 1688 Yesterday morning came here the Corrantiers people to demand custom for their masters putting his small come into the ground, which they say is two cases of spiritts allowed by the Company. I told them I knew nothing of it, but would advise, and what you were pleased to order, they should have. With this answer they were not contented, but threatened to shutt us up in the Factmy , and suffer none to come out nor in till they were satisfied, and had don it, I beleive, had not some of the Cabushiers perswaded them to the contrary. They are gon up againe to the masters, and left word in three days wee should heare farther from them. I cannot tell whether this bas been formerly allowed or no, so humbly advise, desiring to know your pleasure. I shall be at some charge here to the Cabushiers upon the like occasion. I have gott no come in yett, but dayly expect their bringing in considerable quantity, for in a litle time twill be plenty. 705. William Cross Agga, 26 April 1688 Having some hope of a trade, these are to desire you would be pleased to send eight chests of sheets, one hundred and fifty Guynea stuffs, fifty lead barrs, and ten cases of spirritts. Powder likewise will bare a good price if you have any to dispose of. The Currantiers people came againe and would not be putt of under two cases of spirritts. Tis as I understand what they were paid last yeare upon the like occasion. Be pleased to send a hundred or two of one pound pewter basons if any. 706. William Cross Agga, Ultimo April 1688 Yours of the same date have received by the 9 hand canoe, with eight chests containing five hundred and twenty sheets, eighty nine Guynea stuffs, fifty lead barrs, two hundred one pound pewter basons, and ten whole cases of sprritts, in one of which there is a bottle broken. Here is a woman slave which should have come up with last months account, but till now there has been no conveyance, and both the women ffactorys slaves being taken very sick and paine, I have put her to do tbeiJ worke, but as soon as they are well will send this up. I have been very much indisposed these three or four days, with ague and feavour . 