VIII JAMES FORT, ACCRA James Fort, Accra, on the eastern Gold Coast, bad been occupied by the RAC continuously since the 1670s. There was also a Dutch fort (Fort Crevecour) and a Danish fort (Christiansborg) in Accra, both of which are regularly mentioned in this correspondence. Christiansborg had been pawned to tbe RAC by its com.mander in 1685, but it remained in the possession of tbe Danish company; eventually, following negotiations in Europe, the English claim to it was renounced. 1 The correspondence also refers to an attempt by the French expedi.tion under Du Casse in early 1688 to purchase Christiansborg from the Danes, which was opposed by the English on the grounds of their own prior claim to the fort (nos 792 etc.). Accra supplied both gold and slaves. Accra had been conquered in 1680 by the inland kingdom of Akwamu ('Quamboe'), 2 and remained subject to Akwamu during the period of this correspondence. The king of Akwamu who had carried out this conquest, Ansa Sasraku, was still on the throne during 1686-8, and is frequently referred to in this correspondence ('Abenesa11' etc.).3 The trade to Accra was now dominated by Akwamu, the access to it of countries further inland, such as Akani ('Arcanye') and Akyem ('Arkin' etc.) being recurrently disrnpted by disputes with Ansa Sasraku. The Accra correspondence for 1686-8 also provides important evidence for Ansa's continuing military conquests, including wars against Akyem (nos 707 etc.), Akani (no.720) and Kyerepong ('Occrepon') (nos 727 etc.) in the interior during 1686, and in 1688 against Adangme ('Alampo) on the coast to the east (no.796) and Agona ('Anguyna') to the west (nos 802 etc.). 707. Mark Bedford Whiting James Forte , Accra, 15 Jan. 1685 [= 1686] I haveing been very ill and not as yette recovered of an ague and feaver, and also most of our people taken down by fluxes, prevented my writing before; niether am able as yett to finish my December accompt but hope within three or four dayes to be better in health. Trade is very bad by reason of the multiplicity of shipping. I understand by some cannoes belonging to the Mine that some of the people of Kittowes 4 hath cutt some of Captain Crookshanks people heads of: wheather certainely I know not, however Captain Lowe and Captain Ounsteed heard the same newes, 5 so they may be more cautious how they venture ashore in those parts. The goods we want here are vizt tapseiles broad, black bafts, and sheets. Ahenesa is fighting against the Argins, 6 who[ = Ahenesa] is an hindrance to our trade. 708. Mark Bedford Whiteing [James Fort, Accra], 24 Jan. 1685/6 I haveing this opertunity of sending could not lett slip informing you that some Mine canoes some dayes agoe came from Ardra, which informes that the Chaldron [sic: = Charlton] sloope, Captain Latton Comander, the slaves rise on board her and killed all the white men, affterwards cutt the cable, which occasioned her running ashoar, and staved all to peices. 7 This news is not only by the negroes, but by the Dutch ffactors, 8 who hath received letters from those parts. As to trade never was soe bad since my resident here. As to Captain Carters bussiness and news of a pyrate, I shall not give an account, but refferyour Worship to his letter.9 I hope he is safe. Here I am at present much better then I was. We are in want of broad tapseiles, sheets and black bafts, also allejars. Lime and nailes we want much. 709. Mark Bedford Whiteing James Forte, Accra, 27 Jan. 1685 [= 1686] Your Worships of the 25th instant received per Captain Bridges with the goods consigned, vizt ten chests of sheets and one hundred allejars. l am sorry your Worship has noe tapseiles and black bafts in the Castle ofCabo Corso, which sorte of goods the Dutch are well supply'd with. Blanquetts I am well supply'd with, and all so11s of other goods. Trade is very bad, soe I have not taken three mark this month, also slaves very scarce. The ship Mary has been noe small hindrance to our negoc iation. 10 I shall use my utmost endeavour to procure cowes for Capta in Bridges , doubt but must be fforced to send to Olampo for them , 11 here being none to be had for mony. We are in extream want of lime to repair the fflankers belonging to the Castle and other necessarys, which if not done will tumble down. Inclosed is as also a bill of sundrey necessarys wanting to the gunns, which we cannot be without, ifwe should have ocasion in our defence . Also we want more nailes . I hope your Worship will ffumish us with all these necessarys per next. 710. Mark Bedford Whiting James Forte, Accra , 2 Feb . 1685/6 This accompanys the Captain Quow, with my December accoW1t and the ballance thereof , which is  m2  oz2  a7  ta5  having paid before to Mr Humfryes  8  0  0  0  which makes in all for the said month  mlO  2  7  5  More your Worship will receive the ballance  account of January  mkO  oz2  al  ta2  Never meet with such a dull trade, especially this last month , and now Ahenesa hath stopped the way, not suffering any Quamboers to come down the water side, by reason some of them bough[t] a quantity of powder out of some ships and carry it up in baggs, as generally they doe salt, that it might have ffree passage, as being that comodity. Upon the discovery ofit , [he] ordered none to goe down the seaside lest they should by more and supply the Arcanyes with it, who [he] is afraid will come down and rout him out of his cuntrey. 12 How long he will continue in this mind of stopping trade I know not. I have sent up to him about it. I wrote your Worship some day es agoe of some of Captain Crookshanks people being cult of at I(jttowe. 13 It seems it is a mistake, it was Captain Sylvanus Paine and seaven more of his white men . The quarrell begun about filling of water at that place. The said Paine run one of the Negroes through with his sword. Presently affter, they shot Paine on the bead, with the rest of the white men then there preseot. 14 This news brought Captain Crookshanks canoe men, and Phynye , a black boy which went to Ardra with the said Crookshanks . Captain Brouse put on board Captain Pains ship some of his men, she being disabled of seaven or eight. Mr Carter at Ardra 15 is very well, he designs to come up as soon as those ships that are their are dispatcht. This day arrived from thence four great Mine canoes. The sloope Captain Laton and all his men are killed by the slaves which he had then aboard. 16 Your Worship wrote me last for cowes, accordingly I sent to Olampo but can gett none thats good, but are all Jeane, haveing had noe raines this considerable time, that they have nothing to ffeed on, an[d] soe it is with sheep. We are in extream want of lyme, one of the fflankers being ready to tumble down, and part of the tower. Also other places that wants to be repaired, or else will come to ruine. We want also nayles, hooks and hinges and deal boards. I must inform you that William Warner the smith will not doe the smiths office, unless his wages be advanced more then a souldiers pay, here being several! musquetts and other gunns that will spoile if not cleaned and mended. Your Worship promised to send us another gunner in the rome of Thomas Amis , deceased , here being none that can take it upon them, only one and he can niether write nor read, but is a great drunckard. 711. Mark Bedford Whiting James Forte, Accra, 16 Feb. 1686 Yours of the 12th instant is received, and according to order I, Mr Swindall and one Mr Manning went and delivered your Worships letter to Mynherr Hans Luke 17 but could not have an answer, only that upon my desireing him either to write or to give me one by word of mouth, he replyed he would send his boy to me tomorrow with a letter, which he never did, although I sent my boy twice to him this day to know wbeather he had wrote any, according to his promis. I found presently that á your Worships letter was very unwelcome to him, who l think will not nor never will give answer to it. In answer as to your Worships of the 9th instant, I have tryed all means to procure oyster shells to repaire the Castle, 18 here being none to be had. Ifthere was any your Worship may imagine that the Dutch , which have a very fine lyme kill, would never be supply ' d soe constantly from the Mine as they are generally. What oyster shells that is here are very few, and those they pick up from the salt ponds. Neither have we a lyme kill. Besides if their was any possibill ity, we could not have time enough before the raines to gett all materia lls ready , and the Castle wants much repairing, if not done soone I doubt part of it will tumble down. The walls within are built with swich [= swish]. As for timber, we want much deal boards, and nailes of all sortes, also some tarris. Trade is better than it was last month, now they are for snaphances and carbines of the longest sorte. If your Worship have any in the Castle, I humbly desire your Worship to send a quantity of, here being but a ffew carbines in the ffactory. Let the carbines be of the smallest sorte and longest sorte. The Dutch sells great quantitys at 12 carbines per bendy , and IOsnaphans per bendy. These goods I want much at present. Here lyes a Dutch interloper, and a great Ffrench man. As to what the Company makes me debtor, I have examined my accounts and receipts , finding that I have paid more then what the goldtaker Mr Master gives me credditt for in the Joumall, as per -receipt. Inclosed is an account of what I have paid, and what remaynes due to the Company. I would had come up had not trade come in lately. We want some black bafts and some broad tapseiles. lnclosed is also my August account. According to your Worships order I told the armourer that ifhe would not work according to his agreement he should goe to Cabo Corso, now he is willing to work provided he be cleared from duty; if so, I desire your Worship to send another man in his roome. I am in extream want of writeing paper and large paper for my accounts . 712. Mark Bedford Whiting James Forte, Accra, 2 March 1685/6 According to your Worships order with much adoe have procured this inclosed from the Agent of the Deans. 19 I was forced to send my boy twice to him this day, before he would comply. At last I sent him a note, a copy of which is here inclosed, then he sent this letter. By the bearer your Worship will receive my account for February, and the ballance thereof being 6m 3o 6a of gold. We want more sheets , tapseiles, and materialls for the Castle, inclosd is an account. I have a good quantity ofve1y good slaves, if Mr Bayly20 comes down againe. We shall want come and a kettle to boy le canky for the slaves, here being one which I had of Mr Bayly, which is good for nothing. I am in want of a gunner, I am informed that there is one in James Bayley that can officiat that place. Also want carpenters tooles and smiths tooles , as fformerly wrot. 713. Mark Bedford Whiting James Forte , Accra, 16 March 1686 Yours per Mr Slade and goods per Mr James Baily have received, and according to order have dispatch Mr Brown with twenty five men and twenty woman , very good slaves. With what he had before from Cabo Corso makes in all two hundr ed and seventeen males and femayles slaves, as per bill of loading doth apear. lnclos 'd is three, one according to order with the noat of the mens wages. Have inclos' d it in Collonel Steeds Jetter at Barbadoes ,21 mentioning therein bow many men, women, boys, girles amounts in the whole. As to what your Worship is troubled in not sending my slaves per the sloop,22 is because I had noe order. I did not know but might displease your Worship, for the future shall not Jett slip noe opertuoity. I wish your Worship had sent more sheets, they putting of other goods. Inclos' d is an account of all materialls , and dementions of them, wanting at Accra. We want more lyme to compleat the Castle , which will be a great preservation of the same against the raines. The tanck wholes[= holds] water very well and is likely to continue soe. Doctor Mead dyed last night, and hath maid Mr Swindall his executor. I shall for the future send the mony in a five hand canoe. First must see to procure one, this I have is all broak, it will serve some time to land goods. [PS] Just now is arrived the ship James from the Mina . 714. Mark Bedford Whiting James Fort, Accra 18 March [16]86 I hope by this time the sloope is arrived with you affter such a strong tumado and furious raine, which hath occasioned one of the fflankers towards the land to fall down. We cannot raise it without more lyme and a little tarris. Eight hogshead of lyme and one hogshead oftarris or theirabout wi II goe nigh to com pleat all and pint [= point] out the outward work, which will be a great preservation of the forte. We want also more hooks and hinges, ten for the hall windows, bigger than those that was sent last, [they] being short to enter the walls, haveing no hold. Also a few more nayles and those things according to the gunners noate sent per James Baily, carpenters tooles and a few deal boards . As for goods, we want more sheets, broad tapseiles , blew perpetuanoes . .Those sheets sent last are almost gon, we sell none but for gold. As to blew sallampores, I have not the price of then [= them] , which I desire per next. I must informe your Worship that severall good slaves presents but cannot buy them, haveing noe irons to secure them, have ing spared all I had to Captain Brown, who wanted them much, so desire you to furnish me as soon as possible. 715. Mark Bedford Whiting James Forte, Accra, 4 April 1686 Your Worships received per James Bayley with those goods sent by the same conveyance. I have sent back which will not vend, one hogshead of flower rum containing 68 gallons, 22 fine sallampores, 20 damag ' d bafts being taken out of the 12 sent last. More you will receive per the same conveyance rnk6 4oz 1 Oa 1 Ota being the ballance of my March account. lnclos'd is an account of the same, and what slaves I had l have according to order sent up also. When I have direct'd in building up the flanker , and taken an account of the delivery of the Company concerns to Mr Thomas Price , shall not faile to come up with those papers tending to the said Company ever since the departure of Agent Greenhi ll in April 1683.23 As for other matters shall acquaint your Worship of the same at my arrivall, which shall be as soon as possible. Your Worship will receive 11 man and 22 women slaves. We are in want of green, read and blew perpetuanoes. I would had retum'd the lyme cask had Mr Bayley bad taken them in. 716. Mark Bedford Whiting James Fort, Accra, 8 May I 686 Arriving here this morning, heard of a disteurbance which has happen ' d since my departure from my factory , occasion' d by the bearer Shadrick Harrison, a drunken sott. Had it been the first time, I had not sent him up as yett; now finding all promises in vain, could prevail with him noe longer. He tells me he lived to well, and that's the only reason of his obsurdity and sottishness , and further his time is almost out, is also a means and putts him on his ffiggaries 24 and resolutions . I hope your Worship will stop out of his pay a :ffirelock musquett which he broak in two peices in time of doeing duty, also the charge of this canoe and four gallons of rum left unpaid due to the Company. William Warner the smith died before my arrivall, so that we are now destitute of such a man, also one in drunken Shadrick s room, which hope your Worship will furnish us with them per first. Trade has been very bad since my departure, what reason I know not as yett but shall inquire further in that matter and per next shall return advice of all other matters . The Adventure sloop is very leakey, being forced to pump continually. PS. Here is a man ashoar at the Deans fort who was left ashore out of the Jamaica sloop that was at Succondee. If your Worship thinks it fitting I will send him up or intertaine hime [= him] here, he haveing proffer'd his servis both to Dutch and Deanes. The said sloop am informed is returnd to Jamaica, and the reason of this fellows leaveing her I doubt is for no good. lnclosed is a sample of bead , if any in the Castle desire a small quantity for a tryall. 717. Mark Bedford Whiteing James Forte, Accra, 27 May 1686 This is occasion'd up by re[a]son of our great necessity of com , haveing not above five chests left, and sundry slaves besides those belonging to the Castle . Could buy more [slaves] but cannot for want oftbe same. I have wrote to Mr Bayly , who I understand is at Lague, that if he bath a quantity of corn immediately to come down and supply our want, and stopt his cano from goeing any fa1ther, if not then to forward this to your Worship to acquaint you thereof, or elce the said sloop to come down and take the slaves on board ber in order for their passage to Cabo Corso. Trade is soe bad, we take little or nothing of gold by reason of the war that is between the Arguins and Ahenesaw. We want the following goods, vizt broad tapseiles, sheets, bJack bafts, knives, and blew perpetuanoes; also for the Castles use deal boards, some lyme and tarris , by reason of sundrey leaks we find by the furious rains we have bere dayly . By James Baily shall send up my account and the ballance theirof. Here is an enquirey for bouges for slaves, if any in tbe Castle it will be convenient to send some with the price of the same. As to other matters shall refer ti11 then. 718. Mark Bedford Whiteing James Fo1te, Accra, 5 June 1686 Yours of the 31st of May and of the 3d instant is come to hand, and according to order shall procure what slaves possible I can against Captain Thoma s Woodfines comeing down. I have now by me 30 very good slaves, 16 men 14 women. Had I not been necessitated for want of provisions I might have encreased the number. Trade has been very dull these two months , haveing taken little more than will defray the charges of the Castle. Ahenessa haveing war with the Argins is great hindrance to the negotiation in these parts. I am sorry we canot be supply'd with those goods I write for in my last. Inclos' d is my accounts for Aprill and May. The ballance thereof is lmk 0oz 8a 4ta, which you will receive per bearer. Captain Quo is at Annamaboe. I wait'd his comeing down, elce I had sent up these accounts 5 dayes agoe, they being then finisb'd. We are in extream want of a seaven hand cano. Our five hand cano is quite rotten and not fitt to goe on the water any more. Should have a seaven or nine hand canoe for conveniency oflanding goods ashore. This goes by the two hand cano that came from Cabo Corso per Captain Woodfine. I hope your Worship will supply us with lime and tarris, slitt deals and whole ditto, a few nayles of all sorts. 719. Mark Bedford Whiteing James Fort, Accra, 29 June 1686 Your Worships per Captain Thomas Woodfine have received [with] those goods consign' d this place. Those now wanting are per in closed note ; if any of those sorts are to be had with you I humbly desire your Worship to furnish us with them as soon as possible, we wanting them much, as also a great cano , which we canot well be without. These goods according to directions did take on shore for slaves put on board said Woodfine. As to the bouges and manobut bands we are as yet ignorant of the disposall, not knowing what quantity we must vend for slaves or gold, which I desire your Worship to inform us per next. Per the bearer your Worship will receive mkl 6oz 6a 11 ta being the true ballance of the inclosed account. Trade is very dull with us by reason of the rumors of wars in the inland. I am sorry must informe your Worship of the death of Doctor Josuah Pratt, who deceasd the 2ih instant, at 3 a clock in the morning, of a violent feaver that heald him about nine days. His last wi 11 and testament, coppy hereof is bere inclosed. As to an inventory of his things , is mention ed in said will and testament, he haveing put his whole estate in it. As to the disposal I of them, shall waite your Worships answer. Here is also sun[d]rey people sick in this Castle, which l fear will indanger their lives for want of a good Doctor. The Deans Castle is almost all tumbled down. 720. Mark Bedford Whiteing James Fort, Accra, 18 July 1686 Your Worships of the 16th instant per Captain Quow received with a promiss of being supplyed per the sloop very spedily with the good[s] and materialls for the Castle so far for that you have them. I hope now it will not be long before they come, we wanting them, as also herba longees, red ground and no other couler. It will also be very convenient to send some more short irons and mallegetta for slaves use , and a pair of great stilliards, which we canot be without. We have now put twenty five very good slaves, sixteen men and nine women, which shall be sent per ditto sloop according to former order. Ahenesa went from Quamboe about 10 dayes agoe to the Arcanyes in order to war in those parts, so that we canot expect anything of a trade before his return, then may expect a considerable trade, which canot be this two months at least.25 The conveniency is an inclos'd per via Mine . Here is arriv'd from windward the great Portuguez ship and a Dutch interloper, also two more at Barracoe. We have not a man well in the Castle, being all trobled with the feavers, in so much that they are not capable of doein[g] duty. 721. Marcus Whiting Accra , 12 Aug. 1686 Your Worships of the 4th instant received with the goods therein mention. Only two broad nicconees wanting in the baile no.152, also one pautkey in the whole number as per inclos 'd attestation appears. It will be very convenient for Mr Bayly affter his dischargrng his Negro slaves at Cape Coast to come down againe and ly at Barraco, where I am informd slaves are plenty, which cannot be brought here by reason Ahenesah having war with Arguina . 26 The Dutch are orderd to procure what slaves they can, some dayes agoe they sent 50 by a great cano that brought them a supp ly of goods, having liberty to give any sort of goods for them, and I detaind of such an order, is a great hindrance to me in porcureing them. By this conveniency your Worship will receive forty seaven slaves, 30 men 17 women, good Negroes. I must inform your worship that then[= when] 1came down from Cape Coast four chests of sheets [ms 'sheest'] was put on board the Adventure Sloop and consignd me, of which I received but three and gave criditt for no more in my accounts, but doubt am charg'd with them all; if not rectified will be prejudiciall to me. We want more irons, Mr Bayly was forced to make use of them he brough[t) down last. lfhe should come down again, lett him allso bring more rum and red herba longees , ifto be had good. Also the great guns belonging to the Castle are viz. 2 sacer, 5 minion, 5 faulconet, 4 faulcon,27 the weight we cannot justly tell. [PS] l am afraid we shall loose Mr Swindall , who is dangerous sick. 722. Marcus Bedford Whiteing James Forte, Accra, 18 Aug. 1686 My last to your Worship was the Izth instant per the sloop with fourty seaven slaves, 30 men 17 women. 28 This per via Mina, desireing your Worship to supply us per the sloop or other conveniency with more broad nicconees , red ground herba longees, also rum, if any black bafts, if not to send us some black sallompores , course not fine, with its price, and the price of the stript sattins sent per James Ba ily. I am sorry there is no blew perpetuanoes, broad tapseiles , Dutch umbanees or phota longees, sheets, which sorts of goods are sutable for this place. The Dutch by great quantity of slaves with sheets and take great quantitty of mony , for they have bought all the Deans slaves with the same comodity. I must inform your Worship they have lowered powder to one ounce per barrell, they have such great quantity at the Mine and now is become a very dull comodity. The 1611' instant deceas 'd Mr Swindal I of a feaver at 3 a clock in the morning. A coppy of his last will and testament shall send per the next opertunity, he has left all to his wiffe and children. Here is most of the white men sick. We want more short irons, the sloop haveing carried those away which were sent last. 723. Mark Bedford Whiteing James Forte, Accra, 22 Aug. 1686 My last to your Worship was the 18th instant per via Mine, since received yours of the 20th ditto. According to order shall procure as many good negro slaves as opertunity presents. Also the gold with my accounts shall be sent up at the months end according to direction as formerly done. I wrote your Worship also per James Bayly, who depart'd hence the 12th instant with forty seaven slaves, 30 men 17 women. In my last inform'd your Worship of the death ofMr Swindall, who died the 16th instant of a violent feaver , also what goods was wanting at Accra, which as per inclosed noate. Trade is something better than it was. Ahenesa desires of your Worship to spare him a Company stick or cane, he being afraid that some of Quambo people come down in his name. 29 This he desired me to write to your Worship sundrey times before, but forgot it. Goods wanting at Accra, vizt nicconees broad, a good quantity; pa:utkais white, one bail; rum, a good quantity; Dutch umbanees or phota longees, a good quantity; and red ground ginghams; herb a longees and silk Ion gees, red ground no other coll er; sheets, a great quantity, whereof one chest is owing to me, I standing indebt'd for it which never had per James Bayley; blew perpetuanoes, red and green, but especially blew , a great quantity; black bafts, a great quantity, if not to be had, then black sallompires not of the finest sorte; tapseiles broad, a great quantity; also broad pintadoes, red ground, a good quantity; allejars, a great quantity of the reddish sort. The above said goods if to be had are the goods wanting here which will. produce gold or slaves. Memorandum, To send the prizes of the stript sattins, to send us also the prizes of the black sallompores not of the finest sort, also to any new goods that shall come down. To send us more com and short irons for the slaves, Mr Bayly carried them away which he brought down. The Dutch have filled their sloop full of goods to trade at Barraco, the natives being not sufferd to come down . 724. Marcus Bedford Whiteing James Fort, Accra, 31 Aug. 1686 Yours of the 24th instant per the Ann Sloop with those goods consigned here have received. 30 The goods now wanting are as underneath mentioned. Here would be a very great trade if had goods proper for this parts. I am sorry your worship did not supply us with blew perpetuanoes wrote for in my last, also greens and reds . Those pintadoes sent by Hugh Hil I ing31 are most of them white ground, which none but read will vend here, so desire a greater supply per next. As to slaves I have now per me fourty Gold Coast, 25 men J5 women. Slaves are something scarse, and Olampo slaves none are to be had. My people came from thence three dayes , who informs me none are to be had in those parts. Mr Helling I suppose this day is gott to Barraco. By the bearer your Worship will receive mk5 3o 5a being the true ballance of my August account. lnclosed is also coppy of Mr Robert Swindalls last will and testament. People are still very sickly at this place. I desire your Worship to supply us with a new fflag staff and halliards, 32 we haveing none at present, the old one is for nothing . We want also a paire of stilliards, haveing none to weigh anything, upon occasion. Goods wanting at Accra, vizt herba longees, red grounds; Dutch umbanees or longees photaes; sheets; perpetuanoe s blew, read and green; black bafts, as those sent last are almost gone; read ginghams if to be bad; white pautkeis; some brawles. 725. Mark Bedford Whiteing James Forte, Accra, 11 Sept. 1686 Your Worships of the 7th instant have received with goods theirin mentioned per the seaven band cano, which shall be disposed according to directions. The goods now wanting are, vizt more sheets, blew perpetuanoes, redd ground pintadoes, pautkeis white, photaes, red ginghams. I must inform your Worship that the Dutch sells a good quantity of powder but it is in quarter barrells, the blacks will buy no others, half nor whole, of which I have enough by me; if any of the first size , it will be convenient to send some per the return of this conveniency. By the seaventeen hand cano goes forty slaves, 22 men 18 women; could have 50, only hearing Mr Helling at Barracoe had some by him , which he canot so conveniently keep them on board as on shoar, so shall keep the rest untill the return of the sai.d cano, in whjch time I hope shall provide her another cargoe. Mr Price is very ill, who hath continued so this four dayes of a violent pain in his belly and hard bound withal I flies up into his head; God knows what will become of him if no remydy of a doctor, which we canot have here, both Dean and Dutch doctor are trobled with the same distemper. We are also in great want of a Serjant, and for the Castles use a pair of stilliards, a flagstafe and halliards. I desire your Worship to send the irons back per the same conveniency , we haveing hardly any more left to secure slaves. 726. Mark Bedford Whiteing James Forte, Accra, 19 Sept. 1686 Your Worships of the 15th instant per the seaventeen hand cano with fourty chests come have received. By the same your worship will receive ten slaves, vizt 5 men 5 women, with what Hugh Hilling hath on board I beleive will make the number of ffifteen or twenty, which had it not been for him could bad supplyd you with the like number. James Bayly is not yet arriv'd but hope it will not be long. lnclosed is a noate from the gunner for rnatterials wanting. 727. Marcus Bedford Whiting James Forte, Accra , 30 Sept. 1686 Yours of the l 5th instant per the seaventeen hand cano with 40 chests of corn have received. Received also, that of the 26th ditto per James Bayly with the goods therein mentioned, which shall be disposed of when opertunity presents on accompt of the Royall Affrican Company for their best advantage. This accom.panyes Edward Jack.I in, one of the Company apprentice, who for want of his health in these parts has a greater desire to live at Cabo Corso, according to his request have sent him up; by him goes m65 lo 7a 8ta, ballance of the enclos'd account for September. Trade is grone very low again by reason Ahenesah warring Occre.pon.33 Slaves also are grone very scarce , the Dutch here has risen men at a bendy and women at seaven peaze, being an express order sent downe from the Generali of the Mine for the dispatch of Captain Star, a Dutch Company ship, now to windward, who is expected within this four dayes, with Mr Eumthuys Merchant, now at Morea, to goe in her to Olampo for slaves, which I fear wili prove very disadvantagious to Mr Bayley, now there, from whome I have received twelve, vizt 7 men 5 weomen, slaves. I have not bought one slave since the Dutch has risen the above said price. Here is now in the Castle 48, which is enought for the great canoe pasage up. I must inform your Worship that the natives will not buy a blew perpetuano with a green, which is the reason will not vend. Edward Jacklin is paid to the next pay day. Captain Brandfill went hence the 25th instant for Wbiddah. 728. Mark Bedford Whit ing James Fort, Accra, IO Oct. 1686 Your Worships of the 4111and 6th instant per the 17 hand cano with 25 chests of com have received. Per the same goes what slaves is now by me, vizt thirty: 15 men 15 women. I shall according to order procure what Gold Coast slaves presents and allow the price currant. Inclosed is a letter from James Bayly to me, comp layning the dearness and scarcity of slaves at Allampo, which is occasioned by the Dutch, who have sent down an express order to keep them for Capta in Starr who is dayly expected . Slaves are also grone very scarce here, and trade very dull for gold. In the cano goes Mr Griffin of Agga, who being sent on board Captain Poston by Mr Night ingale for certain things for the gunners use wanting at Annamabo, the said Griffins canomen that carryd him on board, stole some of the said Postons ships provitions then a wattering in a tubb, which occasiond them to run away. Captain Poston had no conveniency of landing him nowere but here last Sunday in the evening. I have also received two roles [sc. of tobacco?], for which shall give the Company credditt, and shall endeavour to pay the slaves and black freemen with the same. I have also per the bearer sent up l oz 8a for two cask of palm oyle. 729. Marcus Whiteing James Forte, Accra , 21 Oct. l 686 This accompanys James Bayly, by whome I have sent twelve Negro Gold Coast slaves, vizt six men and six women. I have little or nothing to inlarge, no more than the bad information of a bad trade, haveing not taken soe much this month I fear as will defray the charges of the Castle, which is occasion'd by Ahenesah is now goeing to warr Occrepon, his motion will be next Satterday, soe that it will not be long before our negotiation will improve itse!fe. l must informe your Worship that the 25 chest of come that came last by tbe seaven teen hand canoe from Annama boe is not fitting to give to hoggs, what to doe with it I know not. Also must ffurther informe your Worship that Hugh Hilling spend[s] his time idely, he comes runing down here with the sloope from Barraco, leaveing the Dutch a tradeing there, pretending to come down on noe other accompt than to put of his goods, which is very well known his intention was to cut his beard, and now his humour takes him to run up to Mountford. 34 His adversary the Dutch are well sattisfied with it. He tells me it is your Worships orders for him to trade under my nose , I told him it was no such tbing.35 730. Marcus Bed: Whiteing James Forte, Accra, 31 Oct. 1686 My last was by James Bayly , hope this time is safe arrived. This accompanys my monthly accompts with the ballance and product of a bad trade, being mkl lo 4a 2ta. I hope in a shorte time to find an alteration, now Ahenesah haveing beaton Ocrepon, will not be long ere slaves and gold will be more plenty, being now very scarse. The Dutch Company shipps Captain Starr is still at Olampo, his cargo consisteth most in bouges. James Bayly parted hence in good time, elce his stay would a bin to little purpose. I have now by me 16 Negro slaves. We have had no incouragement of trade all this month, the cuntrey people have absented from hence all along by reason of the above said warrs, now allmost ended. We are dayly in expectat i.on of the Generali of the Mines comeing in these parts, upon what account I cannot lea me of any; I suppose you may have heard to windward, if soe pray advise if possible on what account he comes. Nothing shall be wanting per me to uphold the Companys intrest. I must desire your worship when opertunity presents to ffurnish us with lyme and blacks[= balcks], here being a flanker and some of the sould iers houses ifnot taken up will fall downe. Haveing not elce to inlarge, only we have noe stilliards no more. 731. Marcus B: Whitting James Fforte, Accrae, 8 Nov. 1686 I having this oppertunity by an Annamaboe canoe, cam in good time to answer your Worships of the 3 instante, and cbeifly to desire your worship by firste conveniency to furnish us whith pautkaes white, broad striped sattins, and som sayes; alsoe for Castles use a quantyty of lime and tarris whith some balkes, and for slaves use some come, long irons and shortt irons, for I know not bow suddenly may come a greatt quantity, they coming dayly more and more verry good Gold Coaste slaves from Ahennesah. I sent Ashumah 36 to him with an anchor of rum and a cloath for that purpose, which I find has toock effect: doe verry belive whithin this month to find greatt alteration of trade. I have now by mee twenty five good Gold Coaste Negroes. As to the Generali of the Mirn; his coming downe here, ifhe comes , will not be [I] verry[ly] belive upon any inchrochmente into the Deanes ffortte ; if so, shall endeavor to ffollow your worships orders. The Deanes are in a verry low condition . Should the docter, who is the only moneyed man and chief trader and manneger of all things acted in that fforte, dye, the Generali in the firste place would starve, for he hath not a cracra of himself. The rest of the peopl.e trade for themselves, reiceving noe sal lary for the same reason ; the ffortt ready to fall about there ears, and had it not bin a little repaired by the cost and charge of said docter, the Generali and rest of the people would not have room to putt there heads in.Haveing given you a full accompt of the state oftbe Deanes ffort I rest [etc.] 732. Marcus Bedford Whitting James Fortt, Accra, 14 Nov. 1686 This accompanyes the Generali of the Mina, wbo arrived bear the 9 instant, attended with the Domine 38 and Myne Heer Scheffer . He was received with a greatt dealt ofrespect and civility by the natives, as being bear before [as] a ffactor urged a greatt deall offfamiliaryty and ffriendsbip .39 Last Thursday he invitted mee to his ffortte, where bee made mee harttily welcomee , drunck the King of England [and] Royall Companyes good health, and your Worships continuallity. After this intertaynment , I invitted him to James Ffortt , where as a stranger and in bebalfe of the Royall Company I returned him the like civillity, and on Satterday he was invitted to the Deanes ffortt by Myne Heer Luck, who received him and iotertained him according to his capacity, att the charge and cost of the docter and others in that ffortt. There your Worships health was drunck before the General! of the Mina by the said Hans Lucke, as our Company haveing some intrest att that place.40 I cannot find any inchroachment was made by the Duch Generall nor anything acted by him to the prejudicall to the Royall Company. His coming heare I find was on noe other accompt then to pemse their Castle, haveing brought itt a recrutte offfour greatt gunns, a thing mighty well taken of the natives, they being heare of that humor gladder to receive said commoditys then to take any away. He [h]as alsoe ordered severall things to be allterd in this ffortt, and for the security of the Accraaces from Ahennesah , who threaten them dayly,41 a traangla [= triangular] wall to be build wbithout the Castlee with a tancke, that thereby if Ahennesah should come downe to warre them, they might with themselves secure their wiffes and children from him, a thing verry acceptable to the watterside people, butt doubt Ahennessah will not retturne him thankes when he heares of itt. I understand the Generali has sent a Mina Cabusheer with a greatt dasbee to Ahennesay, what it is I am not as yett certayne, hope shall fully satisfy your worship per the next. Trade is now verry dull for gold and little better for slaves, which must be expected untill the rettume of the said Ahennesah from the feild, which I hope will not be .long, he is dayly expected. I have now by mee upwards of 30 slavees, most men and all Gold Coast. I wrotte your worship last for a ffresh supply of come, long irons and sbortt irons, some staples with nailes of all sortes, hooekes and hinges for windoes and <lores, with two greatt staples for the gattes of the Casell [= Castle], lime a great quantity with some tarris and baulkes, alsoe striped broad sattins, pautkaes whitte, a quantity of sayes. I must info1me your Worship that I understand that there is a great quantity of gold and slaves at Barracoe. If your worship thinks flitting I will supply Bryan Ingall with what is sutable for that place, he haveing sent down to mee twice, tould him could not without order from your Worship and Councill, which shall heare per the next. 733. Marcus Bedford Whiting James Fortt, Accra, 15 Nov . 1686 I wrote you yesterday by the Duch Generali, then wrotte att large. Since Ahenesab has sent downe for some sayes, haveing none to supply him but what is damaged much. Wee wante alsoe some striped sattins, pautkaes white and course sleetias . Feareing elce the Dutch Generali should make any stay att Corminetene and Morea, made mee send this canoe expresly for said commodity. Ahennesah returns tomorrow from the field to Quomboe whith his army, doe belive wiJI cause a greatt alteration of trade. Alsoe wee stand in need of a quantity of lime and ta1Tis, baulkes, staples, two whereof must bee verry bigg for the Caselle gatte, nailes of all sortte, cartridge paper, alsoe some boards for plattformes for the gunns, the want of them occasions the fflankers to be verry leaky and rott the timber ven-y much; and for slaves use some come, long irons and shortte irons. I have now by mee fourty slaves, moste men, which I desire your worship to tacke them up as soone as possible, alsoe to supply us with the above said goods and materialls for the Casell. If any sheets, blacke baffles, Dutch umbanees, herba longees reed ground, broad tapseeles, read ginghams att Cabo Corsoe, desire your worship to furnish us with them as soone as possible , with those above mentioned. Just now could have sould many sayes but have verry few, which are dameged; desire your worship to furnish as soone as possible with them and all other goods wrott for. By the same convenience will send up my slaves. 734. Marcus Bedford Whitting James Fortte, Accra, 20 Nov. 1686 Your worships per the 11 hand canoe have received with the goods therein mentioned , only find one cheste of sheets wanting, the letter expressing six and only five cam to my hands , the canoe men tells mee they received noe more; desire your worship to rectifie itt. I have allsoe received the irons from Hugh Hilling , must desire your worship that when Mr Bailly comes to bringe some along with him , he generally is forced to tacke ours [a]way . According to your worships orders I send noe slaves by this canoe , although I could wish they weare gone , haveing now by mee 54 Negroes slaves, 36 men 18 weomen. I hope itt will not be long are [= ere] the sloope will be down with those goods, vizt more sayes , pautkaes whitte, striped sattins and severall others writt for in my laste; alsoe matterials for the Castle , vizt a good quantity of lime and tarris, deale boards and boards for plattforme for the gunns, also caniges, nailes of all sorttes, hookes , hinges , staples for windoes, whereof two must be verry bigg, being for the Castles gatte. I hope by this time your worship hath received mine of the 14th per the Duch Generali, then wrott att large how affaires went during his stay here, which is the needfull from att present, only wee shall want come, and are in extreame want of canky stones , here being none to be bought for money. 735. Marcus Bedford Whiteing James Forte , Accra, 27 Nov. 1686 Your Worships of the 22dinstant with the goods therein mentioned have received. By the same conveniency of the sloope 42 have sent up sixty slaves, 43 men 17 women, being all she could conveniently carry. I beleive affter her dispatch of this cargoe by that time to be ready for her againe. Then desire your worship to send us more necessarys for the repairing the Castle, I desire your Worshjp to examine Mr Bayly about it, he can give you a ffull accompt how the souldiers houses and two fflankers if not taken up will certainly fall down , may be will doe the white men harm. Also the outward walls want to be plastered ; to repaire this wee shall want a great quantyty of Jyme and some tarris , baulks, boards and boards for platforme for the gunns . We have not a carridge worth any thing in the Castle. I have bought 20 cockernutt trees, which is not enough , we shall want 60 to repair it all. H re we are forced to pay according to custome one angle a ffathom, so thought it convenient to acquaint your Worship of this affaire, to rectiffie it. As to any goods we want is only pautkeis white. I have according to order sent up Mr Charles Charles [sic], who during his stay here behaved himselfe very civilly , and did thee people good servis at [= as] to their healths , in his roome Doctor Walber [= in Dr Walber 's room]. Your Worship did not informe what was his, and his two servants pay, which I desire your Worsh ip to inform per next. I wrote your worship last aboute a chests [sic] which was wanting in the 11 hand cano. God willing, affter my settlement of the Royall Company's concerns in the hands of Mr Thomas Price, by the 12 next month to be with you. PS. These irons sent per conveniency went back againe . 736. Mark Bedford Whiting James Forte, Accra, l Dec. J686 I wrote you last by Mr James Baily, who parted hence the 27 Novembe r last with sixty Negro slaves, vizt 43 men 17 women, I hope by this time draws near you. I am almost ready for him againe, haveing now 30, vizt 19 men 11 women, soe desire a discharge of them as soon as possible. As to materialls for the Castle, I referr your Worship to mine of the 27th last month. We want also canky stones, here is none to be had for mony; also more hooks, hinges for windows, with staples to hang padlocks upon ; and as for goods we want none but pautkeis white. Inclosed is my accounts for November , being mid 7o 7a 7t a, which your worship will receive by bearer. Here is noe trade for gold, I suppose canot be expected before they have discharged themselves of their slaves. I could buy more slaves then I doe, had I the priviledge as the Dutch to buy them with any sorte of goods as the natives doe desire, for ifl will not give it they know where to have itt &ca. The Dutch sent 40 slaves down to Olampo, in order to supply Captain Starr, they being verry scarce there, in a great cano, the said cano spleat in a tumadoe and most of the slaves drownded. As soon as James Bayly comes down and discharges me with these slaves I have by me, which are 30, vizt 19 men 11 women, then please God shall come and pay my respects to your Worship and rest of the Gentlemen. Send us word the price of those na1row stript sattins sent by James Bayly, they seem to be but halfe peices, being but balfe as broad and halfe as long as those broad ones. 737. James Nightingale43 Accra, 5 Dec. 1686 Att my comeing downe went according to order a board the Anne Sloop and delivered your worships letter to Mr Hilling, who tould me hee had imbark aboutt ten marke in gold.44 I understand that the Accraies people45 are intended to fight the Anguinne and Barracoe people by reason they have agreed and perm itted the Dutch [m . 'ducth'] to putt ashore their flagg and flagstaffe without his[ = Ahen.nisa's] leave;46 and Ahennisa intends to bringe the whole country under his command and then to ba-xe a factory settled and a fort built on accompt of the Royall Company of England and nott suffer the hoogen moogen47 formerly the poore distressed to predominate in bis terrytorys as they have done.48 Shall not fail to inspect into the Deanes and Dutch [ms. 'Ducth'] actions, also Barracoe, and give your Worship a true relation of all concemes att my retume , and doe beleive that Mr Whiting will come along with me to Cabo Corso, which will bee as speedy as possible wee canne. 738. Marke Bedford Whiteing Accra , 5 Dec. 1686 Your worships of the 2dinstant by Mr Nightingall, the otbere of the 3d ditto by the two hand canoe by way of express came safe to hande. In answeare to your last, I wrote your worship by my boy Jack, then wrote what quantite of negroes I had then by mee, vizt 30, 19 men 11 woeman; have now 33 men 12 woemen. As to what quantite shall be eable to purchase in a months tyme, may be I00 or 150, itt is a thinge uncertaine , butt ifl had the same priveledge as the Dutch have to give all sorts of goods as demanded, I might en crease the number, for what I refuse to give, they know wheare to have itt, as sheetts , blew purpetuanoes , broad tapseales. I have according to order despatcbt the canoe to Hugh Helling with his letter to make noe stay after the delivring of itt. Mr Nightingall and I beegun the inventorying the ware house last Saturday. As soone as donn shall visitt the Deanes and follow orders, then please god intend to come up along with him. 739. Marcus Bedfordus Whiting James Forte, Accra, 8 Dec. 1686 This accompanyes Mr Nightingall, with whome I inventored the Royall Compa.oyes Warehouse as per inclosed, and according to order went with him to visitt the Deanes. As to the condition and statte of their affairs, I leave to Mr Nightingall to give your Worship a full accompte. I have alsoe showed him what is one [sic] reparred at James fforte, that your worship may alsoe have a full satisfaction of the Royall Companyes ffactory . I would had come alonge with him, being [h]indered in expectation of som slaves from Ahenesah which I expect every moment, beside alsoe an answer from my canoe per my boy Jack. Haveing nothing elce to enlarge, only refer you to Mr Nightingall whom I wish well up. 740. Thomas Price James Fo1te, Accra, 24 Dec. 1686 Your Worships per Captain Francis Buttram and Captain George Nanter 49 have received, with thirty five barrells of powder and two roles of tobacco. According to your Worships order have shipt on board the Dragon forty six men, twenty one woman, good Gold Coast slaves, twenty five pieces of blew perpetuanoes and three hundred forty six dozen of horn halfted knives by tale, the caskes being bad, all being for account the Royall Company of England. Since Mr Whiteing departed hence I have had a desperate fitt oftbe dry gripes which held me for the space of nine dayes, but thank God I am now wel I recover ed, which has been the reason Captain Buttram is so long absent from your Worship, for I had noe rest nor could not send people abroad to look slaves, as I could have done had [it] pleased God to have spared me my health. According to your Worships order shall not purchase any more slaves except I can have them at seaven peaz men and six women, and those shall be good Gold Coast Negroes. The reason their is no nicconees shipt on board Captain Buttram is they are almost disposed of except thirty seaven, and they shall be disposed of for gold, for they are verry much in request here. 741. Marcus Bedford Whiteing James Fort, Accra, 15 Jan. [16]86/7 14thYour Worships of the instant per the Mary, Captain Richard Gilbe11 Commander, with one hundred and ffifty broad black bafts came safe to hand, which shall be disposed for the Company[s] best advantage . This goes by via Mina, haveing this opertunity could not let slip to inform your Worship of my arrival! here the lih instant, w[h]ere I found thlngs in good order but a bad trade for both slaves and gold, which is worst than all. Nothing shall be wanting by me to incourage tbe same, as also shat Ido my endeavour to purchase such quant[it]ies of slaves you advise. Your Worsh ip writes I must not barter away such goods as will vend for gold, not for slaves. Was I here without a neibour 50 the thing might be done; besides we shall make noe hand of it, as long as Manuell Burges the Pourtuguez is here giveing more than the price limitted. Here is now in the Castle merchandable Negroes slaves. By next opertunity desire your Worship to furnish us with the follow ing materialls, viz com, sheat lead, cathridge paper, tar, some planck to mend carriges of guns, and when any sea coale 51 comes also to furnish us with the same, being in sad wantt of lyme. As soon as this month is expired shall send up Mr Price with all my accounts. 742. Marcus Bedford Whiteing James Fort, Accra, 1 Feb. [1686/7] Yours of the 29th January came safe to hand, and in order to advise what slaves might be procured in a months time in these JJarts, it is a thing I canot absolutely resolve, tbe trade now being so dull for that sort of commodity, canot give you the least encouragement immaginable, haveing bought but one man since my last to you. I migbt had procured somewhat more, which for want of giveing them the goods demanded, being contrary to your last orders to part with any such, where [= were] carried another way. I wrote you last to this point and unless we have the same 1ibe1ty as others we can make no hand ofit. We have nither sheets nor blew perpetuanoes, which sort of goods are most in demand for slaves. We could had disposed those perpetuanoes that were ordered up for slaves. If any pautkeis white pray send us a quantity, and more sayes. I will do my best endeavour to comp ly with your desires. In order to it I will send up to Abenesab. I suppose you have not heard since my comeing down he made the Accras pay him 24 sayes, at first be demanded forty bendys, for offering the Anguinas their servis to assist them against him the time he was out against Occrepon. Barracoe we expect dayly the rueing [= ruin] of that place, and all the people to be put to the sword. Ahenesab has taken a fittish to doe it, also has ordered Fanteen people with com, bis intention shortly is for Anguina, 52 in the intrim waits the proceedings of the Aoguinas . A 53against ccron. This accompanyes Mr Thomas Price with November, December and January accompt, with the ballance of December and January. The ballance of December is 7oz 12a 4ta and Januaiy is Im 4oz 13a 6ta, trade being so dull that we take hardly mony to defray charges of the Castle. I wrot last for some sea coals . We are dayly procuring shells, doe not question but to gett enough to supply our occasions. I must infonn your Worship that Dr Walbor humbly petitions for his wages to be paid, him being due since August last, about the 2d ditto, he being willing to find medicines for the use of the Castle, in consideration further desires that his wages might be advanced to 25 lb [= £25] per anno more than his agreement with the Company, being 36 lb per anno. Also one John Bell, his time being expired, humbly pett itions your Worship to goe home. We want more nailes, some planck. I have received 2 I chests of com from Hugh Hilling. I have ordered him to buy more. Here is a matter of 10 chests of com which came from Annamaboe in Mr Nightingales time, not worth hoggs eating, what to doe with it I know not. 743. Marcus Bed Whiteing James Fort, 12 Feb. 1686/7 Haveing this opertunity by Mr Charles Everaas, Cheife Copeman at this place for the Dutch, being bound for the Mina , thought fitt to inform your Worship of our want of sheets, sayes, perpetuanoes blew, and pautkeis white if any. Trade is ve1y dull both for slaves and gold. We here that Ahenesah is going to make pease with Arcanies, 54 if so, am in hope will mend. Here is yesterday arrived a Jamaica sloope and a Dutch interloper. Captain Crookshanks pa1ied hence the ninth innstant. We are now ready for coals to bum oystershells. We want also nailes of all sorts, hooks and staple s, also bolts and some tar, some sheat lead. 744. Marcus Bedford Whiteing James For1, Accra 18 Feb . 1686/7 I wrote you last the 12 instant by the Dutch factor. Fearing least he should make any stay at Comrnnteen or Morea, thought ffit to advise, as per order of yours of the 12'h ditto by Mr Elwes, 55 what goods and materialls were wanting at this place , which are as inclosed noat. As to slaves, shall endeaver to procure what I can that is good at the old price. I have now by me thirty very good; had I had those goods now write for, might have had a greater quantity. I could wish the coals for burning oystershells might be with us speedily , before the ill conveniency of the rains arrives , elce will prevent our design, and what goods I now write for send as soon as possible. 745. Marcus Bed Whiting Accra , 1 March 1686/7 My last to you was the 26th February last by the opertunity of a cano bound to windward. Then wrot you the needfu l!. One [= once] more must inform your worship that unless we are supplyd with corn from windward speedily, we shall be much necessitated for want of the same. The natives here stands so much in need of it, that they will buy it from your Worship; are dayly at me to write to you to send down a sloop loaden ,56 and for these oystershells which now have bought would have faine been paid with it also, which I could not spare haveing upwards of60 Negroe slaves in the Castle, which l wish had a discha rge of them, haveing but a sma ll quantity of corn left. PS. This accompanyes my February accompt with the ballance thereof, being mkO 7oz 6a 2ta. Here is no trade for gold and very little for slaves. We want nicconees broad, and some tarr, qllso those goods and materialls wrote for formerly, not forgetting a speedy supply of corn. 746. Marcus Bed Whiteing James Fort, Accra, 5 March 1686/7 Yours by the 17 hand cano came safe to hand, with the goods and materialls therein mentioned, only ten deal boards the letter expressetb to have sent are not, which we want much, more sheets, and stayes to keep open the windows, about two foot and a half long. The yambs [= yams] shall charg in my account; must infmm your Worship, most of them are very bad and small, and some notfitt to eat. By this conveniency goes 45 Negroes slaves, 30 men 15 women, some of them are resolute ffellows, haveiog diged thee prison wall in one nights time, being six foot thick, three foot and a halfe through ; after have bin prevented of the same, made their attempt to cut us off. You will also receive the irons along with them, which desire your Worship to send them back by my boy Jack, we wanting them much. This accompanys John Bell, who I know nothing to the contrary but hath performed his duty in all particular; and as to Doctor Walber I have informed him what your Worship wrote, who answers he will find medicines for the Castles use, as occasion serves so will b1ing them to account (if used) either every month or halfe year. Desire your Worship to send two more long irons, for Castle slaves, some of them haveing made their attempt to run away. Doctor Walber demands his wages, I know not to what time it is due, nither do I know what he hath a month for sallery and dyett, so desire your Worship to inform per next, or when your Worship pleases. 747. Marcus Bed Whiteing James Fort, Accra, 14 March [16]86/7 The occasion of this cano, is cheifly our great necessity of com, haveing little left in the Factory; moreover our great want of more sheets, broad nicconees, broad stript sattins, pautkeis white (if any). Here the Dutch vend a great deal of com at 3 angles per chest. Ahenesah desires your Worship to send down a great quantity of the same, he will allow the same price ; so will the Accra people, who are dayly at me to write you to that point, and when your worship sends sheets send a greater quantity then useuall, those that came last per Captain Bristow are vended, the Dutch haveing none. As for materialls for the Castle now wanting are deal boards, long irons, and those short irons sent per the great cano with the slaves; also we are much necessitated for carridges for the gunns, haveing not one flitting for use in the Castle, which am ashamd to lett strangers look on them. Must inform your Worship the Doctor desires bjs sallery. What [h]is agreement is with the Company both for sallery and dyett each month I know not. nither from what time due. As to his medicines I wrote your Worships his answer in my last, which hope your Worship will answer per this return. Excuse my ill writeing, being much incommoded with the great paine of dry belly ack, which has hold me violently this 3 dayes. Captain Bristow went hence last Satterday, being very ill. The goods and coals came safe ashore. I desire your worship to send us the com as soon as possible, with the goods and materialls wrote for before and those above. 748. Caleb Leage & Thomas Allner 14 March 1686/7 We your poor servants and supplicants, being through pollicy and fair promises of our master 57 drawn far from our freinds, parents and native cuntrey, are by his unjust detainment of things necessary for our sustinance brought to such extremity through hunger that unless your Worships clemency speedily prevents, and justice sheild us from bis tyranny, we must speedily yeild our selves victims to the jaues of merciless death. For may it please your Worship, we have been near upon three dayes togatber without any victualls or sustinance but water , and then makeing our case known to Mr Whiting, our master for some time [gave us] a taccoe a day betwixt us, but now may it please your Worship, fish not comeing ashore, we have for this great while had nothing but water and a little canky , and when we told him we could gett nothing he told us he brought us over for a cacrifise, and when meer hunger, for who can endure its sharpness, forced us to go to him day by day for our taccoe , he would beat us, and bid us gett victual! where we could, for he would give us nothing , so that now [he] detaining all things from us we did againe complayn to Mr Wbiteing and [be] baveing wrought what he could with our master can gett nothing but that we are bis servants and he will allow us what he pleaseth.whereupon Mr Whiteing hath ordered [us] to petition your Worship, upon whose order and the sharpness of extream hunger we have taken upon us the bouldness to prevent [= present) your Worship with this our bumble petition, beging and humbly beseeching your Worship for the sake ofaUmighty God to look upon the mesery of poor victims. If there be any fault in us we humbly submitt our selves to your Worships sensure, only we beg that we may not die a sacrifice to our masters rage, by the insupportable of hunger [sic], and may the Great God deliver your Worship from all evill and make you happy here and hereafter. 749. Henrick Walber James Fort , Accra, 22 March [1686/7] Understanding here to be an order to Mr Whiteing, by Mr James Bayly of the I 7th March 1687 for sending up to Cabo Corso Castle Thomas Alner and Caleb Leage, because not giveing them full canky mony and other necessaryes not providing for them according tb their desire att Cabo Corso, have given an account to your Worship for laying out the mony before, and here will be judged by your Worship , and little say to what petition or complaint your Worship and the rest of the Gentlemen is troubled with from them or there consorts here. Was it from any honest gentleman it would much troble me. According to order doe send them to your Worship and rest of the Gentlemen to take care better then I have done for dureing the tyme they are to stay in the Royall Affrican Company servis here in Guinee, which was very well done, which for what servis I have bad of them might have come before, and humbly give you many thank.es for the great care and trouble, wish that I could studdy one way to reward it. Shall likewise doe my endeavour to give sattisfaction to Mr Whiteing that there be no complaint made otherwise about me in the Castle. Understand that an order is given for my sallery at 36£ per anno according to agreement made at home, for which I humbly return you many thanks. Likew ise for my dyett at 24£ per anno, which is not according to agreements made at home with the Royall Affrican Company and allowed before the Commander and the Comte, to have dyett at your Worships table, otherwise to have 50£ per anno for dyett, and one servant, which agreement brought with Captain Andrew Brandfei U, under Mr Jacob Heatly's one[= own] hand to your Worship; the coppy Mr Stanton has, which I hope will give sattisfaction to your Worship and the rest of the Gentlemen of the Councell. 750. Marcus Bed Whiting James Fort, Accra, 24 March 1686/7 This goes by the opertunity of a two hand cano bound up to windward, chiefly to answer your letters, one of the t 7'"instant by James Bayly with the goods sent by him, which came safe to hand, the other by Mr Nicolas Papperel158 of the 23dditto shall referr untill I have given answer to the former, being cheifly to acquaint you that finding but small encouragement from Doctor Walbers unhuman useage towards his servants (as he pretends) in not allowing them what is sufficient for their sustinance, in consideration thereof have sent them both up by the Adventure sloop, also have paid them their full canky mony for this last two months past, due from the 2gthJanuary to the 25thof this present instant. As to their sallery have not paid any, leaveing it to your Worship. Your Worship writes 8 angles a month to said Doctor dyett, when he most assuredly pretends his agreement with the Company to be 50£ per anno; I have not paid him any nor shall not untill I have a more fuller sattisfaction, which I hope may be per next. I must also inform your Worship thattbe 1000 yambs sent by this conveniency , most of them are not fitting for hoggs, and those that are good are extraordinary small. I have sent you per ditto one hundred and eighteen allejars, and seaventy broad black bafts in 3 cases, being good [but] not of the right so11. I would had wrought you by him, then being very weak; I have had a hard bout of it, now thank God I am upon the recovery. The two whitemen souldjers came safe to hand, shall pay them their sal\ary according to order. We are extreamly in want of a good man for a serjant, which if your Worship could spare us such a one will doe us a great kindness. Now as to the Allegator sloop, I have not as yett taken anything out ofher,just now being arrived. In answer as to yours of ditto concerning carridges for gunns, the dementions are as followeth: 2 carridges for small seaker and for half a dozen minion. I could wish your Worship would exchange half a dozen facon and faconnett for halfe a dozen long seaker , which if your Worship is willing, at the recept of the other, if you send them or others pray send carridges with them, then shall send the other in their roome; it will doe us a great kindness and will grace the Castle, the Dutch haveing lately exchanged their small gunns, have placed most against us. Also must desire your Worship to supply us with all materialls belonging to them, as spunges, ladles &ca. We want also cathridge paper. As to what your Worship mentions concerning oyster shells they are very scarce here, haveing none but what we pick out of the salt ponds, being hardly enough to supply our occasions. The rains being so upon us shall referr burning any till after they are over. The corn now sent shall doe for the best. I have now by me 20 slaves, shall send them by the Allegator sloope. Send us more sheets and broad nicconees. James Bayly went hence the 22 instant. 751. Marcus Bedfordus Whitting James Forte, Accra, 13 April 1687 My last was the 24 March last, by a two hande canoe bounde to windward. Since departed hence the Allegator Sloope the 2d instante. The goods and matterialls came safe out of her, as wrote you before, only must informe your worship that out of the 150 chests of com 8 was founde wanting to make up the said number. By her went up eighteen negroe slaves, vizt 12 men 6 woemen, with the ballance of the inclosed accompt for March, being rnk4 0oz l4.a. I begg your worships pardone for not writting by that conveniency , being then taken verry ill with a relapse, in soe much that inforced mee to keep my bedd ever since. Now thanke God am upon recovery , hoping in a shorte time to recover my strength againe. As to goods now wanting are sheets, sayes, broad stript sattins; home haft knives. Trade is not verry fluent. As to other matters I refer your worships to my fformer lettere, not being as yett answered, hoping your worships will [answer] by this conveniency . 752. Marcus Bedfordus Whitting James Forte, Accraa, 24 April 1687 Yours of the 12 instante have received, being sorry those goods wrotte for are wanting, wee are in neede alsoe of stript carpitts, Duch humbanees and come, I having sould a quantity of our laste suply , and had disposed of all , had wee not occation of some for the slaves , having now by mee 30, which I desire your worship to discharge us of them as soone as possible . This goes by an accidentall canoe bound up to your partes , being on purpose to advise you thereof. I have acquainted Docter Walber of what you wrotte , whose answer is tbat there was a sertaine covenant whicb came over whith him , the coppie thereof being comitted to Mr Stanton at Caboe Corsoe. Jomy March accompt I finde I have omitted entring the roale [= roU] of sheete lead which you have insertted there , shall not faile to bringe it to accompt in the next. Wee have not received the two hundred of spunge naills which you mention to have sent, soe desire you to furnish us with them per next. Having no more to add at present , only to infom1e you ofmy recovery from my laste distemper. Wee wantt alsoe some tarris, and cartbridge paper. 753. Marcus Bedfordus Whitting James Fo1tte, Accra , 1 May 1687 1 wrotte you the laste the 24 of Aprill per way of a canoe bound up to windward . Then wrott for a fresh supply of striped carpitts, and Duch humbanees and come, as alsoe for a discharge of those slaves wee have by us, amounting to fourty, the major parte being men. This serves allsoe to acquaint you the same, accompan[y ].ing my Aprill accompt, the ballance of it being 5mk 1oz la 2 ta, baveing not sent itt, your order being to the contrary of sending itt by such opertunities unlesse by way of Sloope ot other conveniency more secure. I am sorry you can't suply us with more sayes and such other stores of goods wrotte for formerly , as sheets, broad nicconees , pautkaes white , home haf[t]ed knives , broad striped sattins . Matterialls now wanting for the Castle are catbridge paper , tarris , spunge nailes , and three or four canky stones , wee wanting them much. [PS] Primo May 87. I have forgot to writt about a caske ofpalme oyle . I know not its price , elce would have had sent the money. Itt was a quarter caske send down by James Bailey the 17 March laste. I want noe more. 754. John Boylston Accraa, 12 May 1687 This goes by a two hand canoe which through absolute necessity I have sent to you to requeste the favor that I may have the nine hand canoe send down to mee , with all speed, for mee to retume backe in, there being not one heare to be had either from the Blackes or wbittes, all being useless by reason of theire leakes , and Mynbeere Everas the Dutch coopeman has not any butt a 11 hand , one which came lattly from Ardraa much broaken , elce I beeleive I could verry willingly had itt, butt itt is really verry bad, therefore desire I may have some conveniency of coming up in, which in the sloope I cannott, for shee will have sixty slaves and them verry stoutt lusty people, and will not depart till the middle of the weeke att sonest, for the weather is bad and shea hase butt as yett 17 chests of come ashoare, and I muste either com in her, which Jam veny willing to doe, or else in a two hand canoe, which is verry harde. I am sorry a [= to] putt your worshipe and gentellmen to this trouble, which could I avoid I would nott. I have this day inventoryed the warehouse, and find all we ll and verry inconsiderable damaged in the goods att my returne, which I care not how soone shall render a juste accompte in all perticulars. I am much trobled with griping, and Mr Ellwess has been ill ever since came hyther, 59 and if possib le such a favor could be granted mee, that there might bee one sent to Anamaboe to inventory that ffactory, l should bee verry than.kefull and would doe any thing in leiu of itt, being verry jealous of sickness and desiarous to rettume. There is in the companies laste letter some thing mentioned in relation to Mr Whitt ings accompts with the company , if you will please to signifie to mee what itt, is wereby I may serve your worshipe in itt, should bee glade of the oppertunity. I desire your answer by the canoe, and if any newes from windward a line. Captain Hendrickes is here, and sailes tomorrow, he has invitted mee on boarde, butt cannot posible goe. None of his people has been ashoare here, he has on boarde about 200 negroes , most boyes and gairles. Mr Whiting and Mr Price presents there service to your worship , the former designes to returne in the canoe with mee. 755. Marke Bed. Whiting James Forte, Accraa 17 May 1687 Yours of the 9th instant per fue Alligator Sloope, with one hundred stript Turky carpitts , and one hundred thirty six chests of come, I have received. By the same goes fifty six negroe slaves, vizt 42 men 14 women, alsoe the ballance ofmy Aprill accompt , being mk5 l o la 2ta of gold. In answer to what you write conserning sending for goods (as your worship sayes), having a quaintity remayning you will not find such great number of such goods I wrote for in the invento1y now taken; besides ifl find I have but a bayle of sayes by mee, and I want Turky carpitts, or other goods as wrote for in my last, it would not be convenient the sloope should come downe to mee only with the said carpitts, especially finding other goods vendable; This day God willing doe intend to accompanie Mr John Boylston up in the nine hand canoe. Wee have had very bad weather, elce had been up before now. 756. Thomas Prlce James Ffort, Accraa, 22 June 1687 Yours received dated the 20rh instant, wherein am ordered to inform you what progress Mr James Bayly has made at Alampo since his departure from Cabo Corso in purchasing slaves . Some four hours before the receipt of your letter received one from Mr James Bayly (whjcb have inclosed) wherein he gives an accompt what slaves he hath purchased, which is to the number of thirty eight. He sent then two women full of the small pox (which are in the number), the one dyed in the voyage coming up, the other shall take all care possible to restore her to health, I examined his canoemen whether the slaves on board were most men or women, they replyed he never bought women without men. He may be I judge half way between Olampo and here by the time of his departure, which was the 18th instant. The land breezes are far out and last not long, which will make his passage long ere he him up. According to his desire have sent by his canoe four chests of the best com in the Castle, and have gave him accompt of what you were pleased to order in yours. If he want any sort of goods for the purchasing more slaves he was to be suppl yed here, taking his receipt for the same, and what slaves he should purchase hereafter not to dispose of any without your positive orders. Gentlemen, yours makes mencon of twenty pair of sh011 irons and five long ditto, but have received none. The slaves that have been purchased since the departure of Mr Mark Bedford Whiting are fourteen men and twelve women, good slaves. The irons wee stand in great need of, having but one pair to spare. The sheetes are all disposed of and the sayes, except one piece and a half which is very much damnified. 757. Thomas Price James Ffort Accraa, 30 June 1687 The inclosed received yesterday from Mr James Bayly per hls canoe, by whom he desired me to send it to you as soon as possible. 60 Likewise to send him down some come, he standing in great need of it for the Royall Affrican Companys slaves, which according to his desire have sent him four chests of the best. In your last to Mr Mark Bedford Whiting you make mencon of 20 pair of short irons and 5 pair long irons were sent down by the bearer, but received none then nor since but stan d in great need of them, having purchased since Mr Whitings departure eighteen men, eighteen women, good slaves. Trade hath been dull this 7 dayes, wee have taken little or nothing by reason of 3 Dutch ships, interlopers, which departed hence trus morning. Here is mony comes down, but wee have none of the goods wrucb are in demand, they are sayes and sheetes. Doctor Walber is taken ill this morning, the gunner and William Bonner is ill of an ague and feavour, and three more are lame with wormes. 758. Marcus Bedford Whiting James Fort, Accraa , 8 July 1687 Yours of the 4t1, of July came to hand before my arrivall , which have perused. In answer to it and all other matters shall give you an accompt. This goes by a two hand canoe on that purpose. I have according to your orders supplyed James Bayly with goods and all necessaryes as this place affords , finding him here yesterday morning at my arriva11 on that accompt, his vessell lying at Labordee. 61 I also received his slaves from him, being all 59, so that he has left us some thing threadbare with goods and plenty with slaves , having upward of one hundred and odd slaves in the Castle. I could wish a speedy delivery of them, which I hope you Gentlemen will effect as soon as possible, expecting your orders for the same, which when perused shall follow in all particulars. Wee are mightily put by oflate by the Dutch , whose fresh supply of all sorts of goods proves a great hindrance to us and drawes the natives from our procuring what (ms 'wth'] we desire. I have here inclosed a note of our wants ; I know sundry sorts of them are not by you, being only to give you an insight, but what is with you pray send, it will be a great means in provoking a trade, which endeavours shaJ I not be wanting by me in any wise. Wee also stand in need cartridge paper and all sorts of things belonging to the gunners stores, some rivetts and forelocks for the slaves irons , likewise two clinch hammers , two cold chissells, two punches, and for the repairing of the Castle, the rains having been so furious as you are sensible has occasioned much damage, a bricklayer would be very necessary here, especially to arch the gate, having only a Negroe to help us, who understands no such worke. I shall follow also your desires as to my monthly accompts , which shall be sent up as possible. James BayJy made his return this morning for Olampo. Ifhe should want any more goods as per inclosed wee have not wherewithal! to supply him, therefore once more desire you to furnish us with what you have of the said contents as possible. Our people some of them are very bad in health , most especially our Doctor. I hope God will restore them their health again. (PS] A ship in sight, suppose to be Captain Thompson. [PPS] The Dutch expect a ship every day out of Holland, which ship Monsieur Depalmas is ordered (when she comes) for Olampo to procure slaves. The factor here is providing for her in the interim. 759. Marcus Bedford Whiting James Ffort , Accraa, 10 July 1687 I wrote last the 8th instant and then advised you in fuJl of what goods and materialls were wanting. This goes by the return of Mr Elwes his canoe, and serves to acquaint that wee shaJl very speedily want com, having but 60 chests remaining. James Bayly has had at times in all forty chests. Has also left us very bar e in goods , in so much that for want of the same our neighbour fares the better . This I thought fitt to advise you. [PS] My most bumble service to the Agent. 760. Marcus Bedford Whiting James Ffort Accraa , 17July 1687 This canoe is occasioned up by reason the master of the sloop just now arrived 62 hath forgott his invoyce and other things, 1 suppose writes to you by this oppertunity in order to send them down by the bearer, he staying here till the return oftbe same. 63 Captain Gould arrived here last Thursday and went away last night , by him received the goods you sent. I am sorry must inform you that he was forced to carry one of the great gunns to Alampo to be putt on board James Bayly. Our nine hand canoe (here being no other to be had) by the carriage of the other three splitt in 2 peeces, all the great shott drowned , so that now wee shall want others and a new great canoe. I have comply'd with all your orders and putt on board him ninety one negroes, 49 men, 42 women, as per inclosed bills of lading appears. I was in hopes by this sloop to be supp lyed with goods and materialls wrote for in mine of the gthpast. I am still procuring of slaves. The same have advised James Bayly, now to leeward. Pray also furnish us with com , which wee sba l I want very speedily. [PS] Mr Price presents his most humble service to you all. He is left with me. 761. Mark Bedford Whiting James Forte, Accra , 27 July 1687 Yours by the 11 hand canoe is received with the iron barrs and matterialls for the Castles use. I am sorry you have not sheetes, blew, red and green perpetuanoes, and sayes, which goods are all in demand. When any by you pray send them as soon as possible. Since my last to you arived here James Baily with 48 negroe slaves. 64 Having now almost one hundred of them in the Castle, by reason come is here so scarce and non to be procured for money, refuse the buying any more unless you could procure mee the same provition. Now they are to be had, perhaps when you want they cannot be obtained. I could have wished James Bayly could have made a trip up with all his now procured. I have putt the thing to him , whose answer is that his orders rnnn to the contrary, being to lye here till further orders from you, which I hope will be for him to come up witb them. On[e] of the great gunns is on board him , as wrote you befor e. Here is noe probability of getting her out of the sloope without necessaryes as now he writtes you, for the same might have been ashoare with the rest, our canoe sayfed [= saved] and all the shott, had not Captain Gould shown his tarpauling breeding 65 in not being so good as his word, not assisting us with any manner of things for that use. I suppose you heare the Danes are furnished with goods, alsoe that the Duch Companyes ship that is to slave from the Co[a]st is now arived, news is sent down to Alampoe in order for her dispatch. Pray send us word as soon as possible what your intention is, then shall follow what you shall direct. I humbly beg your pardons for not informing you of the death of William Fisher, itt was my intention soe to doe but in hast forgott itt. His things shall send up by the sloope. Mr Halford is very ill, fear his childessness and fearefullness in his sickness will bring him to the same end very suddenly . Shall informe you further per next, which will be 5 dayes hence, with my months accompts . 762. Marcus Bedford Whiting James Fortt, Accraa, 2 Aug. J687 I wrot you last per the 11 hand canoe, then wrott you of the scarcity of come. This alsoe serves to informe you of the same, none being to be had here in these parts. There is now remaining in the Factory not above 30 chests, and at the expence of three in 2 dayes for 94 negroes slaves now in the Cast le, which I would desire a speedy delivery of them. I have desisted buying any more [i.e. slaves] untill further orders, which I hope will be by the rettume of this att furthest. Slaves presents dayly more then usuall. Perhaps now are to be had; when you want them are not to bee gott. I must informe you that of the 136 chests come sent to this place per the Alligattor Sloope eighteen chests of the same was damaged, being not fitting for hoggs, as per the inclosed attestation doth appeare. By the same goes my monthly accompts for June and July, the ballance for both being 2mk 1 o 9a 1 ta. The same have not sent you, your former orders being to the contrary of sending any gold in a two hand canoe, but by vessells or other conveniencys more secure. Here has been noe trade this two months for gold , Abenesah having stopt the way for the Arkins comeing downe. 66 The goods wanting are sheets, blew and redd perpetuanoes , sayes . Our neighbour the Duch has been well supplyed of latte with those sorts of goods, draws trade from us, alsoe buys great quantity' s of slaves. The great ship is dayly expected downe from the Mina in order to goe downe to Alampoe , Mr Lapalma merchant. James Bayly wrott you gentellmen for necessaryes to gett the gunn of[= oft] the sloope. 67 He has bin here ever since my last, expecting an order what to doe. I hope you will order him up with those slaves now in the Factory, for I cannot keep them much longer without a suply of provitions. Mr Halford contiuews still verry ill, still sometimes is like a distracted man and other times speakes verry rationable ; wants for nothing what this place affords. I am doubtfuJl of his recovery, God help him. 763. Marke Bedford Whiting Accra , 4 Aug . 1687 The foregoeing was intended you , but your cannoe coming just as mine was departing put a stop to it. By the retturne of the same , is to sattisfie you that according to your order shall dispatch James Bayly with what slaves he can conveniently carry, which believe may be 60. I am sorry you cannot suply us with come . Wee shall be forced to put on board the sloope the major part [sc. of com] now remaining ; having tacken well, as tould you before, will not goe halfe soe farr as better , which makes the expence of come the greater, and for the maintenance of those slaves remaining after Mr Bayly have taken the said complement, will be about thirty, what to doe for them I know not, here being no manner of provitions for their substenance , unless wee buy fish and give them halfe allowance in caneky. Gentelmen you write I must doe my utmost indeavours to procure what Negroe slaves I can that are good. Lett mee have provitions to keep them after bought, the thing will be easily donn, and had the Sloope binn suplyed (and myselfe ashoare) with the same might have had two hundred or more then already bought, they coming to saile every day more then usual!. This will prove a great hindrance to the Mary you mention is to be slaved of. The three hand canoe you mention James Baily is in hopes of a better in his passing up. As to William Fishers things, shall send up by him , soe referring you till then. 764. Marke Bedford Whiteing James Ffort , Accraa , 8 Aug. 1687 This accompanies James Bayly in the Adventure Sloop, by whome you will receive the ballance for my two last months accompts for both , being 2mk l oz 9a lta . Alsoe goes by him sixty negroe slaves, vizt 30 men, 30 women, with water, come and other necessaryes I hope may be sufficient for their passage up. 68 For the remayning parrt of the Negroes , I know not what to do, having only 14 cbesls of come for their substenance, which is very bad. I have for a considerable time, as wrote you before , refused the buying any more slaves , which will prove a great disappointment to the Maryá now being to be had and not to be bought. Here is no trade with us, I have not taken one angle this tenn days, the Dutch being supplyed with our wants draws all from our ffactory. Their ship is dayly expected , all provition made for her dispatch. I would have sent you according to order William Ffishers things. Mr Bayly could not take them in. Mr Halford is yett sick, nobody knows his distemper, he is not himselfe, continually raving mad, talks at random, his discourse always about his wife and children in Europe. In this condition hath layn this two or three days, what to thinke of him I know not, he hath no ffeavour , nor any burning (God mend him). lfyou could spare us a brickJayer for a finall time with some bricks to arch the gate, you would do a great kindnesse. Wee want also deale boards, small balkes, nailes of all sorts. 765. Marke Bedford Whiting James Forte, Accraa, 9 Aug. 1687 This accompanyes the sad news of the death of Mr William Halford, who departed this life aboutt 3 this morning. I have not as yett taken an accompt of his things, only have secured them untill the dispatch of this canoe, which I thougb[t] fitt to send her wthout delaying of time. I buryed him as becomes one of his station. The following is a coppy of a letter sent you by the Adventure Sloope, James Baily Master, who had his dispatch yesterday morning. By reason wind would not permitt could not stir. By him goes the baUance of my two last accompts , makeing in all mk2 lo 9a I ta, and the quantity of s.ixty negroe slaves, vizt 30 men, 30 weomen, with all things convenient for their passage up, which hope may prove sufficient. For the remaning part of the negroes our provitions is verry shortt, haveing butt 14 chests of damaged come for their substinance. I have for some time (for want of the same) refosed the buying any more [i.e. slaves], which thing I feare will prove a great disapointmeot to the Marys slaveing off the Coast. Now are to be had, but not to be bought. Here is noe trade for gould, I have not taken one angle this tenn dayes; the Ductb [sic] being supplyed with our wants draws all from us. Their ship from the Mina is dayly expected down in order to her dispatch. Wee have lost more slaves of the small pox. One was this day from James Baily, being newly taken with the same. 766. Marke Bedford Whit ing James Fort, Accra, 23 Aug. 1687 Yours by the 17 hand canoe, with sixty iron barrs and 25 chests of come ( as you mention), in measuring itt (in very small chest) made butt 23. I am sorry you have none of those goods I advised for, it is a greatt hindrance to mee, although trade is now verry dead; whatever gold or slaves comes goes all to the Duch, for sheets, sayes, blew and green perpetuanoes, I see none inquire for any other. Here will bee noe probability of a currant negotiation, as longe as Ahennasah and Arkins are att variance. My endeavor ever was and ever shall bee forward to promote the companyes intrest, and this month will prove worse than laste, doe not take wherewith to defray charges (and which is worst of all) not able to pay soldiers there sallary due to them since the 5th June. What to doe in this case I know not, butt waite with patience in hopes of better times. I shall comply with your orders concerning Mr William Halfords things , all he left being verry inconsiderable . You have here inclosed an inventory for your perusall , another of the same I have sent to Mr Wight. If possible of any saile shalle send him and you a true and faithfull accompt , our people being here soe out of money for want of their pay , that I feare noe good will come on't. I wrot last for a bricklayer and some brickes for the gatte and gunn ports, a thing verry necessary to be donn. Wee want allsoe some nailes of all sorts, a few baulkes, deale boards , all these matterialls I hope will not be wanting. James Baylye is about the Great Divells Hill.69 I feare his voyage up will be longer than usuall, the current running verry strong to leward. 767. Marke Bedford Whiting Ditto , 23 Aug. 1687 Just now arrived this inclosed from the Generall of the Deanes, Mynheer Hans Luke , in order to be sent you as per superscription .70 In tnis canoe goes twelve cows, whereof six belonges to you , the rest are the king ofFettues (purchased by his man). They are very ordinary and all he could procure. I have marked yours with a string on their !egg, that you may distinguish yours from his, or Hoockome e knows them from the rest. The Portugue z is gon to leeward to Mounsieur Lapallma , there to follow such orders as he shall direct, being no possibility of turning to windward. 768. Marke Bedford Whiting James Fort , Accra , 2 Sept. 1687 This accompanyes my accompt for August. You will find the ballance to be unconsiderable , and trade very dull. Ahennasah stiring abroad makes us soe backward in these parts , as currant negosiation cannot be expected as long as he is att variance with the uplanders .71 Now is goeing next month to fight the remaining part of Anguynas .72 It may prove good as to slaves , which are now scarce, either they goe to leeward on board the Dutch Companyes ship (for those supplyes we have not) ore elce none comes downe. Inclosed is an accompt of the disposall of Mr William Halford 's things. An other of the same have sent Mr Rice Wight , to whome shall send the product of the same when opertunity presents of sending the ballance of those inclosed . I am son-y those goods wrote for formerly are not yett arived. ln my last I wrote alsoe for matterialls for Castles use, vizt nailes of all sorts , some balkes deale boards, some breakes [ = bricks] and old planckes of shipping ( when broak up) , which for want of the same to put under the gurms [we] use more lime be half then if otherwise, not forgetting some great iron wedges, for splitting of cockernut trees, as alsoe a great iron maule, two cold chisills, a clinch hammer , and two punches, for slaves use. I have now taken up the soldiers roome, and placed the gatte in the middle. By degrees the Castle will be in good repaire , and ifkeept soe, and not Jett things runn to mine before they are mended, as fom1erly dorm, itt will not prove hereafter soe expensive to the Company to accomplish the same. Wee shall want more cockemut trees, and what shall be dorm on this affaire shall be managed as to as little charge as possible to the Company. 769. Mark Bedford Whiting James Fort, Accraa, 12 Sept. 1687 10thYours of the instant came safe to hand with the things therein mentioned. Since understanding a vessell is arrived you from Europe, occasions this canoe's going up to infonne you off our wants of the several! sorts of goods and materi alls for Castles us, as per in closed. If any an-ived, you will be pleased to furnish us with the same, by the sloop or other convenciencyes. As to the purchasing of slaves I refuse none that come that are good , although now are very scarce. Our being not supplyed as per note is a great hinderance. The Dutch Company shipp of which you write is not very forward, having bought but 90 since her being at Olampo, which with 104 received from the ir ffactory here is 194 now on board her. God knows after this rate how long she may be purchasing her complement of 600. Your letter to Doctor Walber have delivered. It is grat satisfaction to me you know him, and no wonder he'l abuse me (as he bath don), as long as he doth to his and my betters , from whom he hath received more kindness than deserved. It is not long some time past he struck one of the Company slaves, the most necessary man in the Castle, a carpenter, with an iron shovell, wounded him on the side insomuch that the blood came from his mouth. After having comitted the same en-or, and having given him a small reproband [= reprimand] for so doing, did desire him to see him cured , [he] would not but most inhumanely replyed ifhe dyed could but pay for him, an answer not fitting to give me. This is the very reason of the falling out betwixt him and me, and upon that accompt turned him from my table or presence. I had sent him up some time past, had he not sent me the submission inclosed, acknowledging in order in a future amendment. I wonder he should write you to depart this place, when it is plainly appeared his inclinat ion is to the contrary. This is like his abuseing me behind my back, but in my hearing in company [with] the soldiers a thing he denied, but ass sure to be true. What shall I say, he is a man of two tongues. As to his difference with Mr Price, I have called them both to accompt , being for past quarrels betwixt them, when I was up at Cabo Corso, but now renewed . I cannot understand the right, for one says one thing, tbe others says another , and for my part I have not reason to beleive one of them , being very well satisfied is a great Iyer. I must advise you that the Danes have inquired for an answer of their letter per the 17 hand canoe. The Generali is very sick ofa ffiux, and in danger of his life. There is great liklyhood to be wan betwixt Ahenesa and the Anguinas . I wish they would fight and make an end , Jam sure they spoyle the trade. Having not else , only desire to be furnished if possible with those goods and materialls, staying for them, being things much wanted towards the repayring the Castle. 770. Marcus Bed Wbfring James Ffort , Accraa, 19 Sept. 1687 This serves to accompany the sad news of the Deans Generali who departed this life tbis day at thre e in the afternoone of a ffi.ux,73 I thought fitt to advise you thereof knowing the Royall Company has concerns in your hands, also that you direct yourself acco rdingly . This day am invited tomorrow with the Dutch ffactor to go to his buriall. Per next shall advise you further. Your letter by James Bayly just came to hand. Those things sent by him are not as yet landed, You have omitted 2 pit[= pick] axes, tarr and tarris, the most necessary things wee wanted in repayring the Castle, which wee are now compleat ing with all speed . As to goods I hope you will consider us as soone as possible. I wonder what James Bayly can do to leward , there being a shipp there supp lyed with all sorts and makes no hand of it. Some days agoe passed another of the same bound for Ardra , having been six months from Europe, missing his intended port went round about, his people all much [blank]. Trade is still very dull, occasioned as advised you [by] Ahenesa being not contented. What comes down is for sheets , say's, perpetuanoes blew & green. Hav ing not else, in hast. 771. Marcus Bed Whiting James Fort , Accra, 24 Sept. I 687 Having this oppertunity of a Mina canoe bound to windward and thought fitt to informe you tbat those tapseils you intended on board James Bayly for broad prove all narrow , and his long cloths very course, worse than usuall. He is gon to leward to littl e purpose , and wee here being in want of those goods wrote for do little mend the matter. I have in one of my last inclosed you a note, and to supply witb the same if possible per first conveniency. The come sent per the Sloop being measured aboard by your owne chest wants three. Slaves are still very scarce. Desire you Gentlemen to informe me per next, how the soldiers and other peop leare paid at Cabo Corso, which at present I am ignorant of.I am at present much indisposed with a violen t tenasmus ,74 makes me faintand weak, for that reason having kept my bed this three days. Begging your pardonfor my ill writing. 772. Marke Bed Whiting James Fort, Accraa, 26 Sept. 1687 This serves only to accompany the inclosed from James Bayly,75 which is inreference of what I wrot you yesterday, that there is a mistake of goods putt on board him (narrow tapselees , for broad). Wee can doe noe good here, nor he toleward, unless wee were supplyed accordingly. This goes by an Annamaboecanoe, and thought fitt to send you word I am still much undisposed. 773. Marke Bedford Whiting James Fortt, Accraa, 30 Sept. 1687 This accompanyes my September accompt with the ballance thereof, alsoe that ofAugust past, which alsoe had been with you sooner, had I not been in expectation of the great canoe comeing downe with those supplys you mentioned in your last,not as yett in sight, hope will not be long. James Bayly is still to leeward, waiting the same motion. Slaves are now very scarce and trade very bad. The Dutchcompanys ship has but 300 negroes now on board. Monseuir Delapalma is nowcome up here in a canoe, being tired out with the dullness of that negotiation. Iwrote you last to know how tl1esoldiers and a.nd other people are paid at Cabo Corsoe. I understand it's otherwise than £4 per ounce. I have offered the same tothem, wi II not take itt, soe desire your order that I may show them, which wiUgivefurther satt isfaction. 76 By the bearer you will aJsoe receive 6a 7ta, being what William Lawrance owed forme rly in the celler. Inclosed is a noate from our our gunner, being what things are wanting for iliegunns, which wee stand much in need off. Alsoe have sent you a noate of moneysowing him , from the gunner deceased with you. 774. John Bloome Accraa, 5 Oct. 1687 This is to advise you of my arrivall here, where I shall as circumspectly as possibleobserve yours and Mr Whitings commands, and shall always indeavor to comportmy selfe soe well that noebody shall have a just complaint against me.This I doe prom ise, and will by the help of God performe, of which you may be pleased to rest ashured. I am very much oblidged to you for all your kindesses and readyness to serve me, which alsoe injoyne a double obligation on me. Your favors have been soe great, that I shall never know how to recompence 'em but by an obedient observance of your commands. I kiss your hands. 775. Marke Bed Whiting James Fort, Accraa, 7 Oct. 1687 The inclosed was intended you before but the bearer coming put a stop to it, by whom wee have received the goods mentioned. One of the bales of broad tapseiles Iput on board James Bayly, then being at Tisha, 77 from whome wee have received on shoare twenty six negroes , vizt fourteen men , twelve weomen slaves. Now is gon down to purchase more. The bale on board him which proves to be narrow tapseiles, was not India pack.t, neither was there as be says any packers noat, being a repack.t bale. I am fully sattisfied are true narrow ones . I take notice you write of none of the umbanees to be disposed but for gold. You cannot expect to vend them for the same, they always was leeward goods, its those people that buys them. A great quantity of those you send now last are damaged, as may easily be perceived , the bales haveing been much rubbed. Captain Thomas Towers is here at the Deans ffortt. This day sent for me to have some discourse (of 1 know not what). The dispatch of this canoe hinders my goeing, soe cannot as yett give an accompt ofhis proceedings. By this canoe goes Docter Walber , whose dayly abuse, and finding noe alteration of amendment, which is against his promise, I have made bold to cause his removall , which I hope you Gentellmeu will not be against, hopeing I make the exchange ofa worse for a better , and not long are[ = ere] I am supplyed with him. PS. Dr Wo lber is paid to the 5th June , his dyett to the 5th August 1687. You mention a caske of tarr, by this canoe none cam to band, only tarris. 776. Thomas Price James Fort , Accraa , J5 Oct. 1687 Since I understand the Royall Company will have none intrusted in yowá affaires of negotiation but those that they approve off, and have entred secur ity, I humble make my request to you Gentlemen that you would be pleased to consider me, and put me in such an imploy as you shall adjudge not prejudicale to your selfs . Shall willingly imbrace any thing l deserve. You know Mr Halford, whome God was pleased to take away, was sent downe to take the warehouse , a thing then in my charge, now Mr Bloome at present , and [I] destitute of any buisiness , would not willingly be idle, but am still and ever was ready to serve my masters the Royall Affrican Company, it being my duty, as alsoe to obey your comannds , soe that I depend my selfe wholly upon you and refer to your next. 777. Mark Bedford Whiting James Fort, Accraa, 16 Oct. 1687 Meeting with a two hand canoe bound up to your portt , was glad of the oppertunity, hopeing by this time the Ffrancis may be with you. Our wants of the severall sorts of goods I wrote for, you have before you. The sheets sent last I wrote you are all disposed for gold. As to the umbanees I wrote you at large, only must informe you that in those two bales wanted five pieces, vizt in no.181 wanted one, and in no.182 wanted four. I could not find any packers noate in any of them. An attestation for the same shall be sent up at the months end. Come wee shall want very speedily, haveing upward of ninety negroe, slaves in the Castle. Yesterday received a letter from James Bayly, who writes can doe noe good to leeward, as long as the Dutch Companys shipps says lasteth, all the men slaves goeing on board him for the same. It's the same here with us, now the sheets are gonn, wee stand still, and much inquires alsoe for says and perpetuanoes. Send us alsoe some more markt iron barrs. I must desire you Gentlemen to supply us also with two lusty man Ardra slaves. Those few wee have here are imployed in makeing mortar and swish, and others burning of lime, soe that wee want a couple to fetch wood. When the Castle is finished and all worke done (haveing now abundance to doe) shall be rettumed you againe, for if wee irnploy other other slaves wee are in danger of looseing them. 78 The gunners stores as per his note desire the same , and the tarr you mention never came to hand. If any balks, deale boards, pray send us, haveing great occasion for them, more especially for the prisons doores, which are not over secure , and alsoe slitt deale for to fitt a new nine hand canoe. I have according to your orders put the Searjant you sent downe in bis office. You have not informed mee his pay. I wrote you last about the soldiers pay and other matters , which desire an answer. The Dutch Company shipp hath lost 20 negroes and one white man of the small pox. PS. I am sorry to heare of the death of Agent Bradley and alsoe Mr Bucknells att Succondee. 778. Marke Bed Whiting James Fortt, Accraa , 23 Oct. 1687 Yours of the 18th instant with six chest of sheets and an barrell of tarr came safe to hand. This accompanys a two hand canoe bound to Annamaboe. The letters to the Deans copeman have sent him, as alsoe that of [= to] James Bayly, whom I expect here every moment. When arrived, shall follow what you have directed. I am sorry you have noe gunners stores , especiall y carriag es for the gunns , a thing harde to be got out of shipping , alsoe whole de ale and slitt deale. As soone as possible desire a supp ly of bricks to to compleat the arching of eigbteen gunn ports, veny nececessary to be donn , for want of the same our worke is behind hand. The markt iron barrs , come , and rum , with those balks you mention, send us alsoe . I am sorry the Ffrances is not yett in hearing , I doubt much his safety . 779. Thomas Price James Ffort , Accraa , 23 Oct. 1687 Yours dated the 18th instant have recei ved, and according to your order shall waite on you , soe soone as Mr Whiting have made up this months accompt , and bring e them with me to Cabo Corso. Gentlemen, I humbly thanke you for your good proffers , and shall be very carefull and true in whatsoever you shall be pleased to intrus t me in. 780. Marke Bed: Whiting James Fortt, Accraa , 25 Oct. 1687 79I wrote you last by way of Annamaboe under covert of Mr James Nightingale . This accompanys the inclosed , by a fishermans canoe bound your parts , which desire it may be delivered as per superscription .80 I have not elce to write you, waiting the motion of the 17 hand canoe , with those things wrote for , understand you intend her here. If any mor e sheets , send us some. 781. Marke Bed: Whiting James Fort , Accra , 4 Nov . 1687 This accompanys the Alligottor Sloop with forty oegroe slaves , vitz 18 men, 22 woemen . The goods sent by her have received. The bricks are not a quantity enoug h, so desire a greater quantity. James Bayley left this place about four days agoe, with sixteen men , fourteen weomen , besides what others he had on board makes up fifty six. 81 The carriages of the gunns the dimentions shall informe you by MrPrice , who depaits two days hence. The great gunn on board the Adventure Sloop send us, wee want him. The sheets sent are all disposed, so want more. If any goods arrived as wrote you fo1merly send us alsoe , with the iron wedges and iron worke wrote you for. You will receive per the bearer William Fishers things , the inventory and what is due to him shall ffollow by Mr Price. 782. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Ffort, Accraa, 7 Nov. 1687 I wrote you last by the Alligatorr Sloop, then advised you the needful!. This accompanies Mr Thomas Price , who comes up to offer his service to you, tending to his further employ. By him goes my October accompt with its ballance, being 5oz 0a 4ta, also the inventory of William Ffishers, with an attestation for goods wanting in the two bales of phota longees , per the I 7 hand canoe. As for carriages for the guns, and other materialls wanting, the bearer can infonne you . 783. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort , Accra, 12 Nov. 1687 Yours by the Ann Sloop came safe to my hand. Being late have not as yet taken any thing out of her , but thought fitt to answer yours by Monsieur de La Palma. To what you mention concerning the charges in my last accompt, I can assure you, there is nothing brought to accompt, but what was necessruy , and hath duly been paid, as may be maid appear; as also those slaves in sallary which you are displeased at, I lalow of none but what have been allowed the same since my taking charge. If you are pleased to peruse my former accompts you will find the same, and to be without them is a thing impossible. In answer to those that we sent up to you in both the sloops, I acknowledge none but those that went in the Alligator , for those sixteen men, fourteen women were those that were put ashore by James Bayly, and so returned him againe, but a slave may be well to day and sick tomorrow , they are subject to mortallity as well as whites. However I mind what you advise , so shat I follow. The Dutch Company shipp is gon from Alam po, with 504 Negroes. The remayns of her cargo were all put ashore here , being sheets, says, and fine sletias. It hath been a great hiJ1derance to those says you sent last, the Blacks esteeming theirs better than ours. I find you do not approve off our arching the batlements, I shall give you a sat isfacto1y accompt by next for my so doing. In the interim , excuse my ill writing, being in hast. 784. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 21 Nov. 1687 Thi s rettume s the Ann Sloop, per whome you will receive twelve Negroe slaves, vizt six men and six woemen, with one weoman more which I put on board for a canky woeman, in all thirteen. I put all necessarys sufficient for their passage up. I wrote you last by Monseiur Delapalmo per him [sic] in answer of what you wrote me by the bearer, per whom I received the bricks and sheets, which are all disposed. Per next supply us with more, as also some green welch plaines , noe other colours. The gun carriages and things belonging to them Mr Bradshaw 82 will give you a full accompt. According to your order have sent you six iron barrs for to worke the several! necessaryes ffollowing, nailes, books, and hinges for the windows and doores , with some staples , and what other iron work is wanting for the use of the great guns . I could wish you could supply us with some plank to put under them , it would be a great preservation of the flankers , and saving of lyme and timber. Wee stand much in need also of boards , to make new prison doors, which are all very bad. 785. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort , Accraa, 26 Nov . 1687 I wrote you last by the Ann Sloop, which departed hence the 21st instant with twelve Negroe slaves , which I thought sufficient. This goes by a fisbennans canoe, which I thought fitt to acquaint you thereof , also to informe you that wee want some green Welch plains, halfe barrels and quarter barrels of powder , no other sort , wee having wholes enough, which I can not sell . By the Sloop I wrote you the needful] , so refening you ti ll her arrival!. 786. Marcus Bed: Whiteing James Fort , Accraa , 3 Dec. 1687 This accompanys my November accompt with the ballance, being 5mk 3o 7a 8ta. I have not elce to write you , having wrote you the needfull before. In my last, informed you of our wanting halfes and quarter barrells of powder , green Welch plaines and sheets, to be sent if poss ible at first oppertunity. As to other goods , informed you formerly suppose are not as yett arrived with you, soe must waite with patience . By the Ann Sloope , according to your orders , sent you six iron barrs to worke out in the severa 11necessaryes infom1ed you , not forgetting iron wedges ; those sent before are all splitt to peeces , quite out of service . You informed me that I should pay Sarjeant Peter Baldwe r 8a 4.ta per month. I have offered him the same, andcaused him to write you the inclosed. He tells me that you promised him the same pay as he had before at Cabo Corsoe. A Se1jaeants pay is here 11 a per month soe you may use your pleasure and send me me the same , which I shall observe. 787. Marcus Bed: Whiteing James Fort , Accraa , 9 Dec . 1687/ 8 [sic] Yours of the 7th instant came safe to hand, being glad to understand that certaine ships are arrived you, hope with goods proper for this place. You have the perticulars before you , to be more sure have underneath mentioned them againe. I shall observe what you write tending in procuring of Negroes , but you know the Blacks will have what they list, elce will goe to other places , however shall doe for the best. I take notice of what you write concerning theFrencb men. 83 Wee are soe unprovided in our forces that Wee are in greate necessity of those materialls I wrote for the greate guns, which you write you cannot furnish us, soe what to say I know not, referr to patience. 1retume you many thanks for your kind invitation at Christmas and begg your excuse for this time, having a greate deale to doe to the Fort which l would faine see finisht. When done, shall come and pay my respects. Besides Mr Bloome is not as yett verst in the way of comerceing with the natives at [sic] this place requires, soe that it is impossible for me to stir. I wrote you last concerning the Serjeants pay, as yett noe answere, pray informe per next. Soe wishing you all a merry Christmas with a New Yeare. Goods in demand at Accra, vizt nicconees broad, pautkaes white, sheets, sayes, blew and green perpetuanoes, home hafted knives, green Welch plaines, halfes and quarter barrells of powder , broad striped sattins, and red corral !, these goods wee want much. 788. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 12 Dec. 1687 According to your orders have sent you up Mr John Bloome, in the five band canoe. The goods sent per the sloope, Mr James Bayly, have not as yett landed them, being just now arrived. Per him shall acquaint you the needfull, who shall be dispatched as soone as possible with what Negroe slaves wee have, being but few in nwnber, having not bought any this month, now are growne veiy scarce. As to the French men of warr you mention, are not as yett arrived these pa1ts, understand are all at Amersa. 84 Here is none but a Brandenburg and Captain Wyboms tender. By this time I suppose you have an accompt of him[= Wybom's tender] by his boate, which he sent up to you from the Divills hill, he having missed Cabo Corsoe .85 I must advise you that if you thinke convenient from this place, I can furnish you with oystersells farr better than those you have from Amersa, one but of these will goe as farr as two of others. I have now ready 50 butts, shall provide more as you advise your answere as to this point. 789. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 15 Dec. 1687 This accompanyes the Adventure Sloope with twe lve Negroes, vizt six men, six weomen slaves . I am sorry I must informe you of a sad accident. Eight lusty men Negro slaves are run away, which I am in hopes to gett againe, understanding w[h Jere they are sheltered, Ahenisha having promised to see them returned. My misfortune hapened in the manner ffollowing. Having greate occasion for lime for the repairing of the Castle, l ordered the Se1jeant to send the Bwnboys and slaves in long irons to goe and cutt wood for the burning of the same. The Serjeant did, but not with that discretion as he ought to have done , sends ten of the lustiest men in said irons with but two Bomboys. The slaves when they came to the plase assigned them and found their advantage , they seized the said Bumboyes , and wounded one of them in the back, and by chance of 10 Negroes that went out 2 came back againe , one of them being also wounded, which I send you per the bearer. Slaves now are growne very scarse . What comes the country people will have what they list, and without I comply, you cant expect noe slaves. The goods that came per this conveniency I received. The bail es of pau tkaes l opened before Mr Bayly , thirty six of them are much damaged , occasioned by the rubbing of the said bailes . The sheets you sent are all disposed, soe wee want more , a greater quantity , as also broad niccanees. I wrote you last concerning oyster shells and Serjeants pay. Noe more at present , only wishing you all a merry Christmas. 790. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra , 17 Dec. 1687 I wrote you the needful! per the Adventure sloope . Then advised you of our want of more sheets. Those you sent last are all disposed, also almost all the blew perpetuanoes, to that desire a further supply , and broad niccanees ( if any) . Wee are in extreame want of those carriages for the guns I advised per the Ann Sloope and iron worke for the same, also to send us the great gun out of the Adventure Sloope . This accompanyes Captain Quow, who desired the liberty to come up at the buriall of one of his wives . I begg leave he may stay a weeke or two . Hear[ = here] is the Mary. Captain Burdis is gone for Alampo. Captain James 86 is very sick aboard , has not been on shoare by reason ofhis indisposition. Send us more markt iron ba.rrs. Being in hast. 791. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 20 Dec . 1687 I wrote you last by a two hand canoe bound to your parts, then informing you our wanting more sheets , blew perpetuanoes, says and markt iron barrs . This serves to acquaint you of the same, to send us a greate quantity as soone as possible , not forgetting iron wedges and a couple of axes . Slaves are scarse , what comes they will have what they list. Having not elce to enlarge. Just now came to hand yours by Mr Kyte , shall follow what you have directed. 792. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 2 Jan. 1687/8 This returnes the canoe which brought yours of the 26lll past, in which you advised of a letter you received from Mr Fensman 87 concerning the French treating with Ahenisah, to obaine Christiansburg Fort into their possesion, 88 the same sent you via De Mina under cover of the Dutch Generall, 89 and not having any from me affords you some jealousie , as well from the Dutch as from the French. I had informed you at that time, but thought it better and safer way to make the thing knowne to Ahenisah, that the said Fort was ours in pawne, and in equity could not dispose of it, to accomplish their [i.e. the French] desire. Waiteing his answere, in the interim arrived yours, which was much to the same purpose, I also imeadiately acquainted him of it. He pretends that he never knew before that wee bad any right to it, and since it is soe, that wee desired the Castle into our custody, wee should have it before any other nation, paying the 40 bendyes , as the French bad promised, due to him for the Danes, which they dayly refuse to disburse. I told him, as you directed, what was owing from them , they ought to make good, that after wee bad possession of it wee would satisfie him punctually, upon which this day he sent his son to the Danes, to tell them that if they would not make immeadiately due payment he would take Christianbsurg Fort, and deli ver it the English per fforce. This morning to make an end of the busness, Mr Fensman paid 20 bendyes in gold, and 20 ditto in goods, soe then now the French are put by of their designe. As to the Dutch encroaching into this affaire , I am fully satisfied to the contrary. The letter Mr Fensman wrote them I saw, which is to the same purpose he wrote you. I delivered yours to him. Inclosed is his answere, 90 and what he did was his ignorance. Wee want more sheets, niccannees broad (if any). I am sorry you have noe blew perpetuanoes. I desire you to send me some paper, quills, or wax. 793. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 7 Jan. 1687/8 Just now came an express from Ahenisah, who notwithstanding having received bis due from the Danes is resolved to tum them out of Christiansburg Fort for the dayly abuses they give his people, is soe much incensed against them (for the same) that he will beare it noe longer, and resolved to deliver it to the English, in case wee shouJd refuse then to the French. This came to me just now and witball desired me imeadiately to come up to him, and that be himselfe would give me possession. I could not goe by reason of leaving the Factory, but have sent my guner to dive into it. His [ = Ahenisah 's] intention is to come downe to Labardee. He is very angry and furious insomuch that what the Danes gave him, he would not keep it, but in a collerick manner hath sent it back to them. What to say in this case know not, but crave your answere imeadiately . Now receive yours of the 6th instant per Captain Quow. Have noe time to answeare , neither to send you my December accompts , although ready . Shall send you when I have an answere from my guner. I have sent Ahenisah two peeces of sayes as for an encouragement. 794. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 9 Jan. 1687 /8 This accompanies an Arda slave, an old servant to the Company, who hath lost his left hand, occasioned by the fireing of a gun at the salutation of the Castle by a Dutch Company shipp, as I judge bound for Alampo, not spunging the same before he gave it his charge againe, which is a thing I wonder at, a fellow who hath given his attendance to the guner, who is now, as advised you, at Quamboe, with Ahenisah , as yett have noe answere , was forced to make use of the said Arda slave to officiate the same, having noe Whites that understood any thing of that matter, his hand being in such a condition that by good fortune Captain Cowley and his Doctor being here, his Doctor advised it should be cutt of, which he did. Having noe body to ffo.llow the cure, I thought it more convenient to send him up to you, where some meanes may be used. My last advised you that Ahenisah would not accept of the Danes payment. Since have advisd him to receive the same, which he hath done, and after to use his pleasure, which I shall advise you sho11ly. Being in hast. 795. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort , Accra , 18 Jan. 1687/8 This accompanys my December accompt with his ballauce , being 13rnk 6 oz Sa 4 ta. It would have been with you sooner, the difference betwixt Ahenisah and the Danes put by my intent, [he] is still soe much incenced against them that he is fully resolved to turne them out of their habitation shortly , the same to be delivered the English, the French to goe reside at Taisha. I have endeavored to hinder their settl,ement in these leward parts, Ahenisah will heare nothing of it but hath promised me faithfully he will not suffer them to buyld a Fort, only a house, for that reason has ordered them the abovesaid place, where there is noe stones to come at. You are saying that you beleive Mr Fensman is tampering with the Dutch, whereby to inable him to satisfie us.91 I am well satisfied to the contra1y, and can assure you none will have possession but us. When the thing comes to the point shall advise you. As to any pretence of injury done him I know of none, neither shall there any be offered by us, but what shall be acted to his displeasure is through his means, for the King says for [sic] the several! abuses the Danes have done his people , is the thing insenced [him] against them, and fully resolved to remove them from Christiansburg Fort where they now reside, the same to be delivered in the hands [ of the English] as aforesaid , but in case of their refusall then to the French . At that time when I made the thing knowne to Ahenisah, that it was prope rly ours, the same instant the French were drawing up the Articles of Agreement, which was put by, with a promise that none should have it but us. The same woards Ahenisah sent downe by our guner, who is now returned from him. In my last I forgott to acquaint you that the shipp Maty was Iiked to have been consumed by ffire in Accra Roade, it bapned in the manner ffollowing. Captain James, Comander of the said shipp, being ashoare with me, the Cheife Mate aboard tyes a cracker at a monkyes tale[ = tail]. The said monkey being frighted with the same, runs up in the maine topp and [w]raps himselfe in the said saile, with the said cracker, setts the maine topsaile afire, burnt all the same part of the yard and said rigging. The sparkles of the ffire that came from the said topp burnt the arning [= awning] on the quarter deck. By Gods mercy it proved calme that day, having no sea brease, elce the said shjpp had certainely been lost. News was brought the Captain ashoare , in another maner then it was acted aboard, informing him that the said monkey should take the match, as usually it is on the quarter deck, run up in the topp with the same, sett the saile afire as aforesaid. Doe beleeve Capta in James knowes noe better to this day. I was infonned of the truth how the thing was acted by the Cheife Mate on board, by the Master of Captain Wybournes vesse ll privately, who was on board the Mary then and gave his assistance in putting the said :fire out. I am sorry you have none of those goods I wrote for. Wee want the iron worke for the guns, not forgetting a couple ofhatche[t]s, to cutt wood, a few deale boards, to ffix a five hand canoe and seaven band ditto, which, being in greate want, I have bought from Mumford. You wrote me about burning of lyme, it is impossible to doe it here , but if you want any oystersbells you had best advise in due time, that I may gett them ready against oppertunity shal I present. These sort of shells will doe you better service then those you fetch from Amersa. Just now arrived Captain Thompsons canoe from Arda with letters from [=for] you. She hath been 12 days from Whyddah, the people are tired. Tomorrow she shall proceed for your parts. She left Mr Carter there, the Mary, Captain Cowley, and Captain Wyboume .92 Thompson is dead that lived there.93 796. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort , Accra, 25 Jan. 1687/8 This goes by an oppertunity of a canoe bound to Agga , is to infonne you tbat wee [want] some powder , in halfe barrells (if not any, then whole will doe) , and a few boysados , and also to desire you to send downe a sloope , or other conveiniency, to discharge me of30 Negroes, being most men. I am sorry you have noe sheets, says or blew perpetuanoes , those goods are much in demand , as also broad niccanees. You may also send a few iron barrs markt . I suppose that you have not heard that Ahenisah has routed all Alam po people, on the other side of the River V[u]lter. 94 Wee are in want of the iron workt and materialJs for the guns. I must infonne you that heare is sundry letters passes between Doctor Woolber, chyrurgeon at Annamaboe, and Mr Nicholas Fensmen, Cheife of the Danes. Those letters sent here under cover of my neigbor ( and to me) makes me thinke there is something more then ordinary. Besides am informed (by the bye) that the said Woolber writes all transactions done to windward, more especially [by] bis Cheife at Annamaboe , who he makes a laughing stock. 797. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 5 Feb . 1687/8 Yours by the Ann Sloope and powder have received. I am sorry you have not the goods wrote for. I perceive you are against selling sheets at 33 per bendy , which was ever allowed, and thinke it a greate unjustice to pay that whjch I duely pay (an odd sheete for custome) , the Dutch the same, and charges of the Factory you also mention is what was ever expended and brought to accompt. The coales you write for I have none , soe must waite with patience for the iron worke. Monsieur Du Cass and Monsieur Chevalier D' Amon are here.95 I could hartily wish their ridence, am never without their company . Ahenisah[s] sonn Bubbee 96 is on board of them, I suppose with an intention to place them at Tisha. 97 I expect him ashoare eve1y moment to know his proceedings, in my next shall give you a more satisfactory accompt. 798. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 14 Feb. 1687/8 This is by a canoe bound to Morea serves onely to advise you the Ann Sloope departed hence two dayes agoe, with 36 Negroes, vizt 24 men, 12 weomen slaves, being as many as she could conveniently carry. You advised me to buy corne, I have endeavoured , here comes downe noe more that[ = than] what supplys the Negroes occasions. This I thought fitt to advise you in time. As to coales I have none. The French ships are both fallen as low as Labardee, having 7 men on shoare there. Although they are at a distance yett I am still dayly perplexed with their company , having much rongued [= wronged] my selfe with overmuch drinking with them, hath caused my old distemper, a violent tenasmus. I have the assistance of there Doctor. The Captain of the small ship with two more is gone to Ahenisah two days agoe, not as yet returned; what proceedings they have made I know not as yett but when I am informed of the certaine truth, shall punctually advise. 799. Marcus Bed: Whiting Accra, 19Feb.1687 / 8 By the bearer you will receive twenty foure men, twelve women amounting in all to 36 Negroes. I will write you more at large, by spedier oppertunityes. 800. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accraa, 20 Feb. 1687/8 This accompanies my January accompl with its ballance, being m3 0 12a 6ta. It would have been with you sooner, bad not my late indisposition prevented me, which I hope you will excuse. The Ffrench ships are both gon for Ardra , frustrated of their designe , and without setlement. 98 Ahenesah and they could come to noe agreement , demanding of them 500 bend yes for liberty of habitation. Is also still much incensed against the Danes, and they very timerous of him, not daring to stirr out of their Castle, which is continually kept shutt. Captain Waggoner is here, he tells me you were saying you would send letters by him, if so desire you would dispatch them here as soon as possible, [he) designing for Europe 5 days hence at furthest, his resolution being altered of going to windward againe. Here is also arrived Mr Veraus [= Everaus], with Mr Adrians to succeed him,99 formerly chief of Connentine. They brought downe a fresh supply of of all sorts of goods. Here is no trade but for sheets, says, blew perpetuanoes , and broad nicconees. I have according to your order used all means to procure come, here comes no more than what supplyes the Negroes present occasion. 801. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, I March 1687/8 Yours by the 17 hand canoe of the 25th past came safe to band, with the goods therein mentioned. Observe its contents, which shall indeavour to follow it in all perticulars. Must desire a further supply of powder, haveing but nine barrells left of them, three being much damaged. The sheets you sent are very few, desire a greater quantity, with broad nicconees. The powder send with all speed, in quarter or halfe barrells if possible. Slaves are very scarce. What comes goes to the Dutch, he haveing the liberty of sattisfieing the negroes in goods they desire. Wee are much necessitated for want of the great gunn which is in the sloop, and the iron worke formerly wrote for, with a few deale boards. [PS] Pray send us also some boysadoes . 802. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 4 March 1687/8 This accompanyes my Ffebruary accompt with its ballance, being five markes, one ounce, ten angles and eight taccooes. I wrote you in my last for powder, which wee stand much in need of, having but five barreJls left, whereof three are unvendable. Send us alsoe more sheets, broad niccannees, a few boysadoes. According to your order am endeavouring to procure what slaves presents, heare is but few that offers. As to come I cannot procure any. Ahenisah is making all provicons he can to fight the Anguinas. 100This day sent an express for 12 barrells of powder, I had not to supply hjm. He is dayly watching to paniar Mr Fensman, who lives like a prisoner, not daring to stirr out of out of Christansburgh ffort, which is dayly kept shutt from morning until! njght. Pray send us some writing paper and quills, and ome cartridge paper, wee stand much in need of. PS. By reason the weather proves very unlikely, I have stoped the gold from proceeding by thjs canoe, soe ref err untill the oppertunity of a sloope. 803. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Ffort, Accra, 15 March 1687/8 Yours of the I 0th instant came safe to hand by Bradshaw, by whom I received the boysadoes and powder. By this conveniency you will receive no slaves, having only by me to supply Captain Buttrams occasions, they are now very scarce. The Olampo people being most part gon from their habitation, by means of Ahene.sah, tot who is now preparing for to warr the Anguinas, nothing at present vends here but ammunition. The powder you send went ofat its landing, if you can afford a larger supply it will do well, as also sheets. 804. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 20 March 1687/8 Yours received yesterday. The shipp you mention did not arrive me until this morning. As soon as he saluted the Castle and ankored, he sent his Lieutenant and Scrivand ashore, to know whether Monsieur Du Cas left any letters with me, both which persons I knew in Agent Greenhills time. 102 They are designed for slaves, as you advise, and the shipp of the same force of guns (with 60 men, no more) , if possible to windward ofWhydah, if not to proceed further. They pretend their not stay[ing] to windward was thinking to have meet Monsieur Du Cas here , for whom they have certaine letters and orders, which they will dispatch downe by a canoe , if they find incouragement here , if not they will be the bearer themselves. They lye at the Deans roade . This is what I leame of them at present and beleive are upon no bad designe. You write I must spare Captain Buttram some come from this place , then if so I must decease from buying any slaves, having but 60 chests of come left, and 30 odd slaves in the Castle , and to procure any here it is a thing impossible, Ahenesah will I.et none come downe , now shortly is going against Anguyna, neither will he suffer any to buy any other goods than ammunition. Of those perpetuanoes you sent, I have not disposed of one. Slaves also are very scarce. I wrote you by the sloope, some days agoe, that I sent no Negroes , having then no more than what you ordered for Captain Buttram. Pray send us some more phota's and powder if possible. The French man has been but 8 weeks from Europe. 805. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accraa, 29 March 1688 Yours by the Dragon , Captain Francis Buttram , came safe to hand. According to your order have loaden on board him ninteen slaves, vizt twelve men, seaven women, amounting in all with what came from you to forty, as per inclosed bill of loading doth mention , twenty eight men, twelve weomen Negroes. The other two bills shall be sent as advised, and all other perticulars you mentioned officiated according to your directions. This canoe is sent to you expre ssly to infonne you that Ahenisah is willing to comply with your price for powder, and desires if possible to spare him eighty barrells and four chests of snaphanses. Lett them be very good , matching the sample which now I send you, both long and short. I have mony ready for what I write you. Send us also some longees , though here is no trade but for ammunition. The Dutch has a great trade for the same. Ahenisah intends to march out within this twenty days, so would desire you to supply us as soone as possible. The ballancee of February and March accompts shall be forwarded by Mr Price. The powder you sent last Abenisah complaine s was none of the best, desire what you now sent may be good and dispatch it downe speedily. 806. William Clifton James Fort , Accra , 29 March 1688 Haveing this opertunity 1 take the I iberty to acquaint you of my arrivall and to give my hearty [thanks] for all your favors, which by my dilligence I shall endeavor to requite. Mr Whiting received mee very kindly and I doubt not but that we shall live very quietly , which I will endeavor to my utmost , of which pray be assured. 807. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort , Accra , 4 April 1688 I wrote you last, by way of express , for a fresh supply of powder , as yet have no answer. This goes by a small canoe bound to Cormantyne and is to signifie the same , and also to informe you that Mr Thomas Price is lame in his foot and not very well in health . Our canoes here are so leaky that wee have not wherewithall to accompany him up , except wee had deale boards to fix a new seaven hand and five hand. 103 The multiplicity of turnadoes will not permitt him to venture in a small one. All your orders are accomp lisht, in all particulars . I have thought fitting to send you by this conveniency one of the inventoryes , with one of my accompts. The next shall proceed , with its ballance, per first good oppertunity . Here is no trade but for ammunition . Slaves are very scarce. What comes goes to the Dutch, they giving a greater rate to supply one of their shipps , now at Alampo, with 200 Negroes. The rest 300 are now ready for her at the Mina, to make up the complement of 500. You need not talce care to supply me with come. I have endeavoured to supply myself from hence at la 6ta per chest , which will save a great deale of charges. 808. Marcus Bed : Whiting James Fort , Accra, 11 April 1688 [ wrote you last by way of Cormantyne , since having none from you in answer, have mett with an other conveniency by way of Morea , is to informe you that the goods per the Dolphin Pinke , Captain Barratt Comander , came safe to hand . Also have supplyed him with two slaves , vizt a man and a women , to compleate the numb er of twenty Negroes as per inclosed bill of lading , one of which [bills] 1 dispatcht away per the said shipp to the Royall Companys Factors at Nevis , the other two shall proceed per Mr Price, who is detained here for want of a canoe, having none here fitt to accompany him up, unless wee had boards to fix a new seaven hand and a five band , so that he is in expectation of your supplying him from windward . The charges being the same I wrote you last, you need not take care to supply me with come , having procured 300 chests from hence at 1 a 6ta , not knowing whether the same oppertunity might present hereafter . I shall deceas e buying any more , until) your further orders. Note what you write concerning supplying Captain Lomax with twenty Negroe slaves. I advised you that the Dutch draws all to them, by giving greater á prizes, and what goods demanded, to dispatch away their sh ipp now at Alampo with 200 Negroes. The rest 300 is ready for her at the Mina, to compleate her complement of 500. Trade is very dull by reason of the warrs betwixt Ahenisah and Anguyna , which will begin very suddenly, hope then slaves will prove more plenty. 809. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 16 April 1688 1wrote you last the needfull, by way of Morea. This on ly serves to accompany an Arda canoe which arrived here this morning, also to informe you that Ahenesah marcht out on Saturday last with his army towards Anguyna, and lyes, as wee understand, betwixt Winnebah and this place, there expecting the Acc ron and the Fanteeners to treat with them for to help him in his designes. 104 By reason of the same, no trade stiffing. Neither gold nor slaves, nor any thing ofprovitions comes downe. Mr Price would have been with you per this canoe, but [my] being so pestered prevented his voyage. Is as yet in expectati.on of you supplying him with a conveniency from windward. Being in hast. 810. Marcus Bed: Whiting James Fort, Accra, 22 April 1688 Yours of the 15th instant, with the deale boards and nailes, came safe to hand. The bearer has been detained something longer, by reason, according to your orders, have made the needful! enquiry about the quantity of come you mention, which had I knowne your minde sooner, you would have been supplyed by this time. There is great quantityes at Aquamboe, but Ahenesah being gon from from thence to Winnebah with his army, with an intent, as advised you before, so that these people he has left behind him are only old men, women and children , who are afrayd to come downe, for fear of being panyard by the Anguynas. That litle as comes downe I buy, but to give you a certaine time to procure such a number as you advise, it is impossible for me to advise you, although I have a promise , from one of Ahenesah's Cabushiers, whom he left behind to order his affaires at home, (but tis onely his bare word). As I find how many chests are brought in in a week, I shall know how long time it will be before I can answer your expectation, which I shall not miss any oppe1tunity of acquainting you. I am sick of a feavour. Mr Price will be with you in a day or two. 811. Marcus Bedford Whiting James Fort, Accra, 23 April 1688 My last to you was yesterday. Then wrote you the needfull , since which my feaver is so augmented that I am very ill and weake. Not knowing what may iusue, therefore have thought fitt to stopp Mr Prices voyage for three or four dayes longer. 